.. _200605_where_does_talent_really_come:

天才从哪里来？（Where Does Talent Really Come From?）
========================================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/05/where_does_talent_really_come.html>`__

有人发现，参加下个月世界杯的足球运动员大多数是上半年出生的。如果再把青年队算进去，这个规律就更明显了。最新一届英格兰青年队里，有一半选手出生在1月、2月和3月，另一半选手出生在其他9个月里。德国青年队有56个人，其中52个出生在一年中的头三个月里。这是为什么？

四个选择。

（a） 某个星座的人特别具有足球天赋。

（b） 冬季出生的孩子耐氧性比较高，有利于足球运动。

（c） 足球狂家长更可能在春天怀孕，那时是一年中赛季最热闹的时候。

（d） 以上答案都不对。

Anders
Ericsson，58岁的Florida州立大学心理学教授，认为应该选择d。因为他研究发现，人们所谓的天赋很大程度上并不是”天赋”，而是后天得来的。（Expert
performers — whether in memory or surgery, ballet or computer
programming — are nearly always made, not born. ）

具体说，才能很可能不是天生的，而是通过”有效练习”（deliberate
practice）获得的。

所谓”有效练习”是指这样一种过程：

（1） 有特定的目标。（setting specific goals）

（2） 能得到及时的反馈（obtaining immediate feedback ）

（3） 对过程和结果同样注重。（concentrating as much on technique as on
outcome ）

如果一个人长期的以这样方式进行训练，他往往在该领域比别人取得更出色的成果。

回到足球运动员的例子，为什么大多数出色的足球运动员出生在一年中的头几个月？一种可能的解释是：欧洲的青少年足球运动员选拔制度，是按年龄段划分的，以12月31日为界；同一年中1月1日出生的孩子，和12月31日出生的孩子是分在一个年龄段里的；教练在选拔人才时，往往会选择那些看上去更成熟的孩子。于是，那些出生在年初的孩子会得到更多的机会，更专业的训练。长此以往，他们自然就会比同龄的其他孩子做得更出色。


=====================

**A Star Is Made**

By STEPHEN J. DUBNER and STEVEN D. LEVITT

原载2006年5月7日《New York Times Magazine》

| 
|  The Birth-Month Soccer Anomaly

If you were to examine the birth certificates of every soccer player in
next month’s World Cup tournament, you would most likely find a
noteworthy quirk: elite soccer players are more likely to have been born
in the earlier months of the year than in the later months. If you then
examined the European national youth teams that feed the World Cup and
professional ranks, you would find this quirk to be even more
pronounced. On recent English teams, for instance, half of the elite
teenage soccer players were born in January, February or March, with the
other half spread out over the remaining 9 months. In Germany, 52 elite
youth players were born in the first three months of the year, with just
4 players born in the last three.

| What might account for this anomaly? Here are a few guesses: a)
certain astrological signs confer superior soccer skills; b) winter-born
babies tend to have higher oxygen capacity, which increases soccer
stamina; c) soccer-mad parents are more likely to conceive children in
springtime, at the annual peak of soccer mania; d) none of the above.
|  Anders Ericsson, a 58-year-old psychology professor at Florida State
University, says he believes strongly in “none of the above.” He is the
ringleader of what might be called the Expert Performance Movement, a
loose coalition of scholars trying to answer an important and seemingly
primordial question: When someone is very good at a given thing, what is
it that actually makes him good?

Ericsson, who grew up in Sweden, studied nuclear engineering until he
realized he would have more opportunity to conduct his own research if
he switched to psychology. His first experiment, nearly 30 years ago,
involved memory: training a person to hear and then repeat a random
series of numbers. “With the first subject, after about 20 hours of
training, his digit span had risen from 7 to 20,” Ericsson recalls. “He
kept improving, and after about 200 hours of training he had risen to
over 80 numbers.”

This success, coupled with later research showing that memory itself is
not genetically determined, led Ericsson to conclude that the act of
memorizing is more of a cognitive exercise than an intuitive one. In
other words, whatever innate differences two people may exhibit in their
abilities to memorize, those differences are swamped by how well each
person “encodes” the information. And the best way to learn how to
encode information meaningfully, Ericsson determined, was a process
known as deliberate practice.

Deliberate practice entails more than simply repeating a task — playing
a C-minor scale 100 times, for instance, or hitting tennis serves until
your shoulder pops out of its socket. Rather, it involves setting
specific goals, obtaining immediate feedback and concentrating as much
on technique as on outcome.

Ericsson and his colleagues have thus taken to studying expert
performers in a wide range of pursuits, including soccer, golf, surgery,
piano playing, Scrabble, writing, chess, software design, stock picking
and darts. They gather all the data they can, not just performance
statistics and biographical details but also the results of their own
laboratory experiments with high achievers.

| Their work, compiled in the “Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and
Expert Performance,” a 900-page academic book that will be published
next month, makes a rather startling assertion: the trait we commonly
call talent is highly overrated. Or, put another way, expert performers
— whether in memory or surgery, ballet or computer programming — are
nearly always made, not born. And yes, practice does make perfect. These
may be the sort of clichés that parents are fond of whispering to their
children. But these particular clichés just happen to be true.
|  Ericsson’s research suggests a third cliché as well: when it comes to
choosing a life path, you should do what you love — because if you don’t
love it, you are unlikely to work hard enough to get very good. Most
people naturally don’t like to do things they aren’t “good” at. So they
often give up, telling themselves they simply don’t possess the talent
for math or skiing or the violin. But what they really lack is the
desire to be good and to undertake the deliberate practice that would
make them better.

“I think the most general claim here,” Ericsson says of his work, “is
that a lot of people believe there are some inherent limits they were
born with. But there is surprisingly little hard evidence that anyone
could attain any kind of exceptional performance without spending a lot
of time perfecting it.” This is not to say that all people have equal
potential. Michael Jordan, even if he hadn’t spent countless hours in
the gym, would still have been a better basketball player than most of
us. But without those hours in the gym, he would never have become the
player he was.

Ericsson’s conclusions, if accurate, would seem to have broad
applications. Students should be taught to follow their interests
earlier in their schooling, the better to build up their skills and
acquire meaningful feedback. Senior citizens should be encouraged to
acquire new skills, especially those thought to require “talents” they
previously believed they didn’t possess.

And it would probably pay to rethink a great deal of medical training.
Ericsson has noted that most doctors actually perform worse the longer
they are out of medical school. Surgeons, however, are an exception.
That’s because they are constantly exposed to two key elements of
deliberate practice: immediate feedback and specific goal-setting.

| The same is not true for, say, a mammographer. When a doctor reads a
mammogram, she doesn’t know for certain if there is breast cancer or
not. She will be able to know only weeks later, from a biopsy, or years
later, when no cancer develops. Without meaningful feedback, a doctor’s
ability actually deteriorates over time. Ericsson suggests a new mode of
training. “Imagine a situation where a doctor could diagnose mammograms
from old cases and immediately get feedback of the correct diagnosis for
each case,” he says. “Working in such a learning environment, a doctor
might see more different cancers in one day than in a couple of years of
normal practice.”
|  If nothing else, the insights of Ericsson and his Expert Performance
compatriots can explain the riddle of why so many elite soccer players
are born early in the year.

Since youth sports are organized by age bracket, teams inevitably have a
cutoff birth date. In the European youth soccer leagues, the cutoff date
is Dec. 31. So when a coach is assessing two players in the same age
bracket, one who happened to have been born in January and the other in
December, the player born in January is likely to be bigger, stronger,
more mature. Guess which player the coach is more likely to pick? He may
be mistaking maturity for ability, but he is making his selection
nonetheless. And once chosen, those January-born players are the ones
who, year after year, receive the training, the deliberate practice and
the feedback — to say nothing of the accompanying self-esteem — that
will turn them into elites.

This may be bad news if you are a rabid soccer mom or dad whose child
was born in the wrong month. But keep practicing: a child conceived on
this Sunday in early May would probably be born by next February, giving
you a considerably better chance of watching the 2030 World Cup from the
family section.

Stephen J. Dubner and Steven D. Levitt are the authors of “Freakonomics:
A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything.” More
information on the research behind this column is at
www.freakonomics.com.

（完）

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/05/where_does_talent_really_come.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com