.. _200809_are_we_falling_or_flying:

Are we falling or flying?
============================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2008/09/are_we_falling_or_flying.html>`__

Did you watch Grey’s Anatomy — the most popular TV drama in US now?

If you did, you likely remember a beautiful song titled `“falling or
flying” <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lpfHf_X04A0>`__ featured in one
episode.

Everytime I listened to it, I am always touched by its lyrics:

    | Are we falling or flying? Are we falling or flying?
    |  Are we living or dying?
    |  I guess we’ll never know

    | The air’s so heavy
    |  It could drown a butterfly
    |  If it flew too high

    | Are we falling or flying? Are we falling or flying?
    |  Are we living or dying?
    |  I guess we’ll never know

All my 30-year life is just like the song title: flying dreams and
irresistible downfalls.

|image0|

| This afternoon, I received a mobile call from the government (as
alleged). On the phone, a man told me with a polite tone, but you can
obviously feel a kind of intangible and perceptible intimidation within,
that a recent my blog entry is NOT allowed to publish on the internet,
so it has to be deleted as soon as possible.
|  Without any oral resistance, even without asking why, I deleted the
article as soon as possible, like a silent lamb.

The man said “Thank you”, hang up the phone.

I felt great shame for my humiliating tameness. Although this blog is
hosted on an oversea server without the danger of unplugged, I am afraid
that they would block the visitors from China, and I am more afraid that
they would come to my home. So I did what they asked me to do.

In last 5 years, It is the first time that I deleted my own article
after publication on this blog. Even you are an independent blogger,
they still can control you. …I am so sad.

Now, the final decision is I will NOT criticize or talk of the Chinese
Politics here anymore…. I know it is a regrettable decision, but it is
certainly the right time for me to do something else.

In fact, I feel I have said more than enough about the horrible and
woeful Chinese dark reality. All my words did not make any difference.
Evil is still evil, China is still China. Nothing happens, nothing
changes. In the end, I am tired of saying it again and again, and now I
gave up.

In the future, I will only write some reading thoughts and technical
notes here, and want to do something new which can really change
something old. Let us see what will happen…. There is a sentence from
the deleted article I will never ever forget, which is “STRUGGLING FOR A
NEW CHINA”.

|image1|

The following is one of my all-time favorite songs: `Elton John’s Rocket
Man <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z2hu2EwCm-k&feature=related>`__.

Just like he sang:

    | It’s lonely out in space
    |  On such a timeless flight

    | And I think it’s gonna be a long long time Till touch down brings
    me round again to find I’m not the man they think I am at home
    |  Oh no no no I’m a rocket man
    |  Rocket man burning out his fuse up here alone

    And I think it’s gonna be a long long time…

This is a road much longer than I thought. If we are lucky to have the
day finally reaching the end, it’s gonna be a long long time…

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2008/09/are_we_falling_or_flying.html>`__

Evernote

**

Highlight

Remove Highlight

.. |image0| image:: http://i260.photobucket.com/albums/ii7/ruanyf/blog/526168679_abf6ef200c.jpg
.. |image1| image:: http://i260.photobucket.com/albums/ii7/ruanyf/blog/2265514986_b684f72f3c.jpg

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2008/09/are_we_falling_or_flying.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com