.. _200512_del_jameswithout_you:

Del James的《Without You》
=============================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2005/12/del_jameswithout_you.html>`__

前几天，我下载摇滚乐队Guns and Roses的MTV《\ `November
Rain <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/mt-archives/2005_12_19_233.html>`__\ 》，一下子喜欢上了这首歌。

这部MTV和音乐本身一样精彩，并且是有情节的。

它的开头部分是一个婚礼，男主角和女主角在教堂结婚，接着是露天的喜宴：蛋糕、美酒、客人们伴着音乐在草地上起舞。突然，天降大雨，宾客们四处奔逃，宴会草草结束。

|snapshot20051225141416.jpg|

|snapshot20051225141356.jpg|

|snapshot20051225140615.jpg|

然后，MTV一下子转入了结尾部分，从婚礼变成了葬礼，女主角躺在棺材里，男主角悲痛欲绝。

于是，我就纳闷了，女主角怎么会突然死去呢？她的死因是什么呢？看不出来啊……到网上一查，发现和我有同样疑惑的歌迷真是不少，大家都在问，为什么她死了？其中，有个歌迷的猜测让人捧腹。他说，是不是她淋到雨，得了肺结核呀？

在MTV的最后一个画面，有一行字幕：”根据Del James的短篇小说《Without
You》改编”。很显然，要知道答案，就必须去读这篇小说。

于是，我又去查Del James是何许人，发现他是Guns and
Roses乐队指定的传记作者。只在1995年出过一本短篇小说集《恐惧的语言》（Language
of Fear），《Without
You》就收在其中。此人也是隐士作风，不喜欢出名，虽然外界对这本小说集评价很高，但是他只写了这一本就不写了，消失在公众视野里，这些年来没有任何关于他动向的报道。

《恐惧的语言》这本书也早就绝版了，在美国也不容易找到。在Amazon上，二手书开价150美元一本。

不过，好在有歌迷把《Without
You》扫描放上了网，于是没有书，也可以读到这篇小说了。

今天上午，我花了两个小时坐在电脑前，把它读完了。确实是优秀的作品，但是非常的颓废和压抑。它描写了一个摇滚明星回忆已故的前妻，他的生活一片混乱，这只是因为他已经没有了她。我觉得这是值得一读的作品，把星期天上午花在它上面非常值得。

现在，我知道女主角为什么死了，但是这不重要。如果你听过歌就知道了，就像一个网友说的，是十一月的雨杀了她，这才是她的真正死因。

这篇小说的英语不难，很容易看懂。如果我有时间的话，我真想把它翻译成中文。不过，恐怕就像我的很多愿望一样，这也是虚拟语气。

好在我还是有时间把小说的开头几节译成中文的，:)


=======================================

| 
| 
梅姆很想一起下去跳舞，但是不敢打扰那个美人。她优美的身体孩子般的扭来扭去，很安静，合着节奏慢慢的移动。她的天真让人着迷，她的美让人屏住呼吸。梅姆知道他这样鬼鬼祟祟的偷看会让她生气的，但是他男人的身体内依然是一个十几岁的偷窥狂，他忍不住不看，也不在乎会有什么后果。此外，这也仅仅出于他眼睛的需要。她的眼睛会说话，让他想到大海，巨大无边，优美并且神秘。一阵微风吹起她狮子般的金发。一套全身极薄的衣服包裹住她匀称的身体，汗珠仿佛一层薄薄的釉彩使她身上闪着光。她美得简直不像真的。在视觉无比享受的这一刻，梅姆不得不承认她是他唯一爱的女人。她的眼睛眨了一下。他想她一定听到了我，因为她转向了他。他不想破坏这种美，只想享受它。她的厚嘴唇感应似的笑了。接着，那首歌的音量开始变大了。

当他意识到这是哪首歌的时候，一阵剧痛穿透了他。冷汗从他的毛孔渗出，恐惧吞噬了他。他的眼前变得混乱，什么也看不清，他的呼吸变得困难。绝望袭击和扭曲了他瘦弱身体上的每一块肌肉。比痛苦更糟糕的是他的恐惧。当他向音响走去的时候，不可抗拒的焦虑彻底压倒了他。每一样东西都失去了原来的样子，墙，地板，就连空气都变得那样超现实。音乐越来越响，他发现控制它也越来越难。他不得不拿下CD，但是他的腿好像灌了混凝土一样。他移动的速度太慢了。她已经举起手枪，对准太阳穴。

砰！

梅姆醒了，满身都是汗，一声无声的尖叫仍然卡在他的喉咙里。过去的六个小时，只是一场来自药物和酒精的昏迷，他把这样叫做睡觉。一直以来，睡眠就是一种稀有品，没有某些协助几乎不可能完成。睡六个小时还是六分钟，对他无所谓，恶梦总是要发生。安眠药和抗忧郁剂也不起作用。这首歌是他写的，所以永永远远的被它诅咒。他举起颤抖的手，从额头抹去汗珠，在缎子的床单上擦擦手指。他手臂上金银的手镯叮当作响。他翻了个身，盯着黑色床头柜上的数字闹钟，床头柜底部有一个冷藏柜。闹钟的顶上是一包半空的万宝路香烟。他盯着闹钟上的绿色数字，但是它们毫无意义。现在是几点根本不重要，他的时间不过是其他人的金钱罢了。比钱或时间更重要的是闹钟旁边的东西。他慢慢的坐了起来。红肿的眼睛扫视了黑色的大理石桌面，寻找可能被遗留下来的任何一点珍贵的棕色粉末。那里有火柴，弯曲的雪茄，空的小纸包，但是没有大麻。没关系。他总是有办法让更多的被送过来。梅姆坐在床边，弯下腰，打开床头柜下面冰箱的门。里面有几瓶百威啤酒，苏打水，还有一瓶冻得冰冷的香槟。他抓起一个冰冷的易拉罐，一口就喝了一半。每天早上，他都是这样。一瞬间，他发痛的头开始感觉好些了。虽然他不想承认它，但是已经到了必须回到生活的时间了。他知道他马上就必须赶到录音棚里，但是他做不到。他最新专辑的录制在一个月前，已经完成了。这张专辑现在正处在最后的混音阶段。如果梅姆喜欢他听到的，并且同意的话，专辑就将按计划发售了。否则，它将一直处在混音阶段，直到他同意为止。如果他同意了，那么他对他们还有什么作用呢？在最后时刻到来前，他能耽搁多久就耽搁多久。


==========================================

附：小说原文

**Without You**

By Del James

| 
|  Although he wanted to share the dance, Mayne could not bring himself
to interrupt such beauty. Her well-toned body swayed childlike,
peacefully, slowly moving to the rhythm. Her innocence was enchanting,
her beauty breathtaking. Mayne knew she’d be angry at him for sneaking
about, watching without letting her know, but the teenage voyeur inside
his adult body encouraged him and didn’t care about the consequences.
Besides, this was for his eyes only. Her eyes sparkled, reminding him of
the ocean, vast with beauty and mystery. A slight breeze danced through
her lion’s mane. A full-length see-through dress covered her shapely
body and a light glaze of sweat made her glisten. She seemed too
beautiful to be real. During this split second of visual euphoria, Mayne
conceded that she was the only woman he ever truly loved. Her eyes
flickered. She must have heard me, he thought as she turned toward him.
He didn’t want to ruin the beauty, only to enjoy it. Her thick lips
smiled sympathetically. Then the song started growing in volume.

A sharp twinge of panic shot through him when he realized which of his
songs it was. Cold sweat seeped out of his pores and dread consumed him.
His vision spiraled as reality distorted. Breathing became difficult,
complicated. Desperation attacked and twisted every muscle in his thin
body. Much worse than the pain was his fear. Unsuppressable anxiety
swept through him as he started toward the stereo. Everything lost its
natural texture; the walls, the floor, the air became surreal. The
louder the music, the more difficult he found it to move. He had to
remove the compact disc but his feet felt like large concrete blocks. He
couldn’t move fast enough. She already had the pistol’s barrel against
her temple.

BLAMM!

Mayne awoke covered in sweat, a mute shriek still lodged in his throat.
The past six hours had been spent in a drug-and-alcohol-induced coma
that he put over as sleep. Sleep was a rare commodity and was impossible
to achieve without some assistance. It didn’t matter whether he slept
six hours or six minutes, the nightmare always managed to creep in. No
sleeping pill or antidepressant could spare him. He had written the song
and was forever damned by it. With unsteady hands, he wiped sweat from
his brow and rubbed his fingers against the satin sheets. His silver and
gold bracelets clinked together. Rolling onto his side, he stared at the
digital alarm clock on top of the black night table that had a built -in
refrigerator as its base. On top of the clock was a half-empty pack of
Marlboros. He stared at the green digital numbers but they made no
sense. It really didn’t matter what time it was anyway, his time was
other people’s money. Next to the clock was something more important
than cash or time. Slowly he sat up. Tortured eyes scanned the black
marble tabletop, searching for any leftover precious brown powder. There
were burned matches, bent cigarettes, and empty bindles, but no dope. It
didn’t matter. He could always have more delivered. Sitting on the edge
of the bed, Mayne reached down and opened the night table’s refrigerator
door. Inside were several Budweiser’s, baking soda, and a chilled bottle
of Dom Perignon. He grabbed a cold can, killing half of it in one sip.
He did this every morning. Instantly, his aching head began to feel
better. Although he didn’t want to admit it, the time had arrived to
rejoin the living. He knew he had to be at the studio soon but didn’t
feel up to it. Besides, the recording of his latest album, Alone, had
been finished over a month ago. The album was now in the final mixing
stages. If Mayne liked what he heard, he’d approve it and the record
would be released on schedule. If not, it would have to be remixed until
he did approve. So then, what the fuck did they need him for? He
procrastinated for as long as he possibly could before finally standing
up.

| 
|  Much like his bedroom, the bathroom was a disaster area. Discarded
clothes, creams, trash, cassettes, and towels dominated the view. Using
radar to locate the bowl, he found the porcelain, fought off the urge to
puke, and relieved himself. He reentered the bedroom, not really feeling
human, more like a robot dressed in rented flesh. There was a dull pain
in his abdomen that he’d grown accustomed to. It, like many other flaws
in his health, could be attributed to his excessive life-style. Besides
hi jewelry, Mayne only wore Jockey briefs. He stumbled over to his
dresser, removed a pair of custom-tailored black leather pants, and
changed. He found a dark purple silk kimono hanging in a walk in closet
and put it on. In a dresser drawer was a gram vial of cocaine. Scooping
with the long fingernail on his right pinkie, the tattered musician
snorted eight blasts of rock ‘n’ roll aspirin. The kimono felt cool
against his warm flesh. He wondered if he was feverish and concluded he
probably was. He was always run down, as if with a perpetual fever. That
is, of course, until he got his chip. He finished his beer, tossing the
empty can in the general direction of a wastebasket that was already
crammed with empties. Staring into a full-length mirror, the run-down
recluse didn’t recognize the reflection. Sure, the long blond hair and
tattoos gave him away, but he looked so frail. Mayne looked like someone
who was ready for hospital pajamas. His once attractive face was blue,
taut, and expressionless. A scraggly beard covered his chin and his
emerald eyes were no longer authentic gems, but rather costume jewelry.
He needed a drink.

For the past fourteen of his twenty-eight years, he’d spent the majority
of his time inside a bottle. Teenage beer and wine parties turned to
vodka and rum at nightclubs, which in turn evolved into straight
whiskey. Exiting the bedroom, he said a silent prayer to his patron
saint, Jim Beam, asking that there be some in the liquor cabinet. An
illuminating golden glow surrounded the thick blackout curtains. A small
war had gone down in the living room the previous evening. Full
ashtrays, assorted liquor bottles, empty and half-empty packs of
cigarettes, and beer cans were strewn everywhere. Several CD covers were
caked in cocaine residue. Mayne tried remembering who had been partying
there and couldn’t. An empty pack of Kool cigarettes meant that one of
his many dealers, Jamie Jazz had delivered something. It didn’t take
very long before he made the connection between the empty bindles in the
bedroom and Jamie. Jamie (pronounced Jay-mee) was typical Hollywood
trash who hand delivered coke, toke, crack, or smack to troubled
celebrities, exploiting their vulnerabilities. Mayne searched for more
clues as to who else had been over partying but came up blank. He slid
behind the bar that was adjacent to the kitchen and opened a cabinet.
There were several unopened bottles of assorted white liquors. A nervous
surge shot through his small stomach. What if there was no whiskey? He
shuffled the bottles around until he found the proper one. A sigh of
relief escaped him as he twisted the cap off and made a mental note that
he needed to restock. The whiskey’s aroma was his equivalent of fresh
brewed coffee. “Here’s looking at you, love,” Mayne said aloud, raising
the bottle to his lips.

Like every day, one sip led to another. After several sips, he started
feeling right. He put the bottle on the counter and made it to the
refrigerator. If he was lucky, he’d be drunk before the day started. He
removed another Budweiser and went back into the messy living room.
There was a dull hum inside his cranium. He couldn’t differentiate
whether it was cocaine-induced or the central air-conditioning. If only
he could remember what day today was, then he’d know if a maid was
scheduled to come by. She could bring booze. The musician sat on the
couch, picked up the phone, and dialed 411.

“Operator. What city, please?”

“L.A.”

“Yes?”

“What day is it? Mayne asked sincerely, lighting a Marlboro.

“What?”

“What day is it?”

“Sir, I’m an operator.”

“Ma’am, you’re Information and I asked you a question,” Mayne corrected
her. A snide laugh escaped him. After a silent moment, she answered his
question.

“It’s Wednesday, sir.”

“Thanks,” he said, and hung up. There would be no maid service today.
This was not the way he wanted to start the day. He polished off the
beer, finished his cigarette, and snorted more cocaine. After several
confusing seconds, he remembered where he kept the large green garbage
bags and began straightening up the mess. Moving around the large
one-bedroom condominium, he picked up anything that wasn’t bolted down
and threw it out. Bottles and empty food containers stretched the
garbage bag to a point where it threatened to rip open. After ten
minutes of straightening up, the apartment began taking shape. Besides
this condominium, he also owned one in Manhattan and another in Houston.
He rarely frequented his Hollywood Hills mansion, or for that matter,
his house in Maui. Both brought back too many memories of her. It was in
the Hollywood Hills house where he and Elizabeth Aston had spent most of
their quality time. As his thoughts began betraying him, thinking more
about her, Mayne instinctively went to the bar and retrieved the whiskey
bottle. He could think of her as long as he had a safety net. With all
the money, fame, and success he had attained, it was the simple things
like friendship and love that were the hardest to keep. He never meant
to hurt anyone, especially those closest to him, but for some reason
that’s who he usually hurt the worst. He never set out to be malicious,
but by living under a microscope with the world scrutinizing him, any
wrongdoing, public or private, tended to blow up in his face and often
wound up as Nightly News. Personal flaws and @!#$-ups are not allowed of
the elite. He often suffered silently, trapped by his own fame, until he
needed out of his cage. But the cage was as wide as his eyes could
perceive. All Mayne had ever tried to be, right or wrong, was himself.
With all the doctors, specialists, therapists, fans, and everyone in his
organization trying to help him, he just sank further into his cocoon,
alienating himself even more. He often wondered who he really was. Was
he another regenerated social security number automatically inherited at
birth or a genuine reflection of society? Was he a phenomenon or just a
facade? Was he a product of his own imagination or just another brick?
Would he ever understand his own destiny?

Inside his mind, he analyzed why his relationship with Elizabeth had
failed more times than were countable. Like the scholar he wasn’t, he
dissected situations, pondered things he should’ve said and shouldn’t
have been caught doing. When it came to sex, why couldn’t Elizabeth
understand that just because he occasionally strayed from their bedroom
didn’t mean he didn’t love her? Sex was like role-playing. He never
forced her to be monogamous but deep down he knew that if he found out
she was fucking someone else it would have hurt. A lot! Even with that
knowledge, he couldn’t confine himself to only one woman. He wanted to
have his cake and eat it too. He tried being open with her but concluded
that certain things should’ve remained secret. Sex was an ego addiction
similar to the one felt onstage. Different audiences, like different
partners, were more challenging and made him work harder for the
applause. Like drugs, he was addicted to the rush. Even with an empire
at his disposal, money couldn’t buy him love, nor happiness, nor peace
of mind. Nor Elizabeth. Looking around the large living room, a very
disenchanted artist absorbed the modern decor. None of these possessions
except a few token items had ever meant anything to Mayne. None of this
shit was real. He was surrounded by trophies of a game that had no
meaning. And he was tired of playing games.

A sharp pain in his left ear sent him back to the dark corridor that led
from stage to dressing room. Inside his ringing head, speakers feeding
back ignited and exploded. He was experiencing another rock ‘n’ roll
side effect, ear damage. The dull hum lasted only seconds but the
memories of his final show with his former band, Suicide Shift, would
never fade. For reasons he couldn’t remember, Elizabeth had been unable
to attend the tour’s final show. The band had been on the road for the
better part of fourteen months, over 285 concerts. Every few weeks Mayne
had flown her to whatever city he was performing in and she’d stay for a
few nights. The final concert of any tour is an important night. It was
Suicide Shift’s first headlining tour and Mayne wanted to share the
experience with her. It was the culmination of many miles traveled, many
hours worked, and the celebration that went on afterward was well
deserved. He called her several times to offer her plane tickets, trying
to persuade her, but she couldn’t make it.

The gig was well over two hours of electric ferocity. Of course Mayne
consumed plenty of drugs and alcohol before and during the show (he did
every gig), but it was the Florida crowd’s enthusiasm and knowing that
he’d be able to sleep for a month that gave him extra spark. Every time
he took a solo, he tried to best any previous soloing effort. Every time
he approached his microphone to sing backups, his voice surged with
whiskey vigor. For him, this was rock ‘n’ roll at its best. The
4,000-plus crowd acknowledged this with deafening applause.

After the final encore, it was time to celebrate. Mayne wound up with
two eager females in his hotel room. In the privacy of his bathroom he
injected a little heroin. Not enough to make him nod out but enough to
get him good and high. The two nubile females would only make him feel
better. After struggling to get his wet brown suede pants off, he joined
the nude women, and thus the revelry began. The dope clouded his
not-so-good memory but Mayne remembered a very drunk Peter Terrance
walking into the room. The band’s drummer had mistaken Mayne’s room for
his own. In the spirit of celebration, Mayne offered him a girl.
Terrance declined saying he’d find his own and left. The menage-a-trois
continued. Shortly afterward there was a knock on the door. Thinking it
was Terrance taking up the offer, Mayne called out, telling whoever was
at the door to enter. Standing at the door with an overnight bag was
Elizabeth. On the spur of the moment she’d flown from L.A. to Miami to
be with him. A very bad scene played itself out. Elizabeth left broken
and hysterical. That was the beginning of the end for their
relationship.

| Mayne snapped out of the past. His left knee popped loudly as he
straightened his legs and headed for the phone. He pushed a button.
Elizabeth’s number was still programmed and every now and then he pushed
it just to hear her phone ring. Also in the phone’s memory was his
record
|  label, his manager, the three members of his current band, the Mayne
Mann Group, and several drug dealers. After receiving no answer at
Elizabeth’s, he pushed another button. His many bracelets clinked
together and a few seconds later there was a reply.

“Yeah?” spat an unenthusiastic voice from a car phone.

“It’s me,” Mayne said, swallowing, cocaine dripping down his throat.

“My main man,” Jamie’s voice declared like a cash register ringing.
“What can I do ya for?”

“Uptown and downtown.” Cocaine and heroin.

“No problem. You remember what I did for ya lastnight, right?”

“Yeah.” He didn’t.

“You owe me three bills from that shit, brother man,” the dealer
explained just in case memory failed.

“I’m sure I got some change floatin’around. If I can’t find some I’ll
five ya my Versateller card and you can get what I owe.”

“Bet. I’ll be right up,” Jamie said as if he was doing Mayne a favor and
hung up.

“Fuckin’ prick,” Mayne mumbled to himself.

He lit up a cigarette and got himself another beer. The lid popped
loudly and foam rose to the mouth hole. He watched, amused, then walked
over to the black-out curtains and pulled the lever, letting bright
sunlight invade his living room. “Fuck you very much,” he loudly
announced, squinting, and raising his middle finger to the sky. The view
from his balcony was vast, displaying the City of Angels below, yet more
often than not Mayne kept the curtains shut, preferring not to be a part
of the world outside. It was safe inside his apartment. Against a far
wall, tucked in the corner so that the ivory keys faced out toward the
living room, was a vintage Steinway. He spent many pleasure-filled hours
on the instrument, and even when he wasn’t playing, the piano gave him
visual stimulation. It was an instrument of precision and grace. Next to
the piano, resting comfortably on stands were half a dozen vintage
guitars: Les Pauls, Stratocasters, and Telecasters. The guitars he kept
in the apartment were the ones that meant the most to him.

| The buzzer sounded, waking Mayne from his drifting thoughts. He went
to the intercom and pressed the button that unlocked the front door. A
few minutes later, Jamie Jazz was inside his apartment. Dozens of
platinum and gold records adorned the walls. Hours upon years of
planning, writing, recording, and struggling had reaped these round
rewards. His songwriting stemmed from inner pains and his slower, more
blues-influenced songs often dealt with personal hardships. Those were
the songs he was most proud of and believed
|  might stand the test of time. The faster, more hard-rock-oriented
songs often had little
|  significance or wore their meanings on their sleeve. Unfortunately,
the awards were no longer awards without Elizabeth. Mayne excused
himself and went into the bedroom. Hidden behind yet another platinum
disc was a safe. He removed the disc from the wall, twisted the
combination, and opened the safe. Inside were jewelry, documents, over
four thousand dollars cash, a freebase pipe, and a loaded .357 Magnum.
He grabbed a few C-notes and went back into the living room, leaving the
safe shut but unlocked. Jamie was seated on the black leather couch,
feet up on the marble coffee table, looking casual in Suicide Shift
sweatpants (that he’d gotten from Mayne) and a matching sweatshirt. He’d
helped himself to a beer.

“What’s the total?”

“Including last night? Six,” Jamie replied, fidgeting with the beeper on
his waist.

Mayne handed him six bills and put the rest in his pants pocket. Judging
by the look on his face, the dealer understood he wanted to be alone and
took the hint.

“Call me if you need anything else,” Jamie offered, exiting the
apartment.

| The moment the front door clicked shut, Mayne’s mind rushed into
overdrive but his body refused to move. He had drugs in hand, but
instead of finding a syringe, he went back into the bedroom. Something
in the wall safe more powerful than his addiction had caught his eye. He
walked to the safe and pulled the door open. Inside was a photo album
containing precious Kodachrome memories. Placing the drugs on top of the
messy night table, he fell on the bed, and began flipping through the
leather-bound book. Captured in photos were images and feelings so
intense that it made him warm as well as suicidal. Elizabeth had
challenged him intellectually while stimulating him sexually. She’d
mothered him when
|  he was sick, which was quite often. She’d set free inner feelings
that he’d often tried
|  avoiding. Her beauty, both inner and physical, was something he
wanted; yet when she was his, he did everything conceivable to lose her.

| He turned to the second page. He had no idea how many times he’d
masturbated to this photo. Every other day perhaps. It was just a
snapshot he’d taken of her while on vacation in Las Vegas. In photo
form, the wind blew her long hair away from her face and she was
smiling. Behind her was the Caesar’s Palace hotel where they’d spent the
better part of two weeks in the penthouse suite. It was a typical
tourist photo but it was her
|  smile that turned him on. It was so free from pain. Mayne would do
anything to have her smile for him like she had in the photograph. He’d
do anything to have her lips, her body again.

He unbuttoned his leather pants. Before beginning his self-stimulation,
he pulled himself over to the night-table refrigerator and removed an
unopened bottle of Dom Perignon champagne. The bottle opened with a loud
pop and smoke billowed from the top, but no liquid spilled.

| Sipping deeply from the bottle, he flipped through the photo album
that was all too short,
|  carefully avoiding the final page. He rarely looked at the last page.
As always, he wound up back on page two. With the bottle two-thirds
empty, he pulled his pants and briefs down to his knees and poured the
remaining champagne onto his palms. This was part of the ritual. Fine
champagne was something he and Elizabeth enjoyed sharing. He could still
share it with her. As he took hold of his wet erection, his thoughts
began to slip. It was during one of their final dinner dates that she
had said something that inspired him to write the most beautiful song of
his career. “I can’t live with you and I can’t live without you,” he
could hear her saying as if it were just yesterday. Words flowed from
pen to paper faster than he could write. Mayne concluded that this was
his private way of explaining all that had happened between them. The
song “Without You,” was not an apology, it was his side of the story. It
was rock ‘n’ roll sincerity that sold over three million copies in the
U.S., topping the record sales charts and putting the Mayne
|  Mann Group on top of the rock world. He offered Elizabeth half of the
royalties from the song because without her there would be no song. She
politely declined. A sold-out Mayne Mann Group tour ensued. When the
tour arrived in Los Angeles, Mayne desperately wanted to see her. No
matter how many women he had, no matter how over her he told everyone he
was, he’d do anything for her except let her permanently slip out of his
life.

He’d called her a dozen times over the course of two days, leaving
message after message on her answering machine. Even though she never
responded, he’d left her ten All-Access passes at Will Call. She never
showed.

After the show, Mayne vowed he wouldn’t make the same mistake twice. He
quickly showered, changed into dry clothing, and left, avoiding all the
backstage hoopla. He and his driver headed for Elizabeth’s apartment.
Using the phone in the limousine, he dialed her from the street below
her apartment. Again he was greeted by a recorded message.

| “Elizabeth, I know-I hope you’re there. I’m downstairs and even if I
have to break down the door to see you, I’m willing. If you’re gonna
call the cops, well, call ‘em now… I don’t expect anything from you. I
don’t deserve anything … Fuck, I don’t even know what I’m trying to say
other than I still care about you. Words can’t heal what I’ve done but,
fuck, the past is done … I really need to see your face again,” Mayne
softly explained after the beep. The words still echoed in his mind as
he wondered
|  if he could’ve possibly phrased things differently. It was too late
now, he thought, already inside the building. This was one of the rare
occasions after a gig that Mayne was sober. As he arrived by way of
elevator at her floor, he heard familiar music. The closer he got to her
door the louder the volume grew. Then his world began to spin
uncontrollably as a loud gunshot echoed through the hallway. He ran
toward her apartment, lowered his shoulder, and with reckless abandon
crashed through the wooden door. He’d found Elizabeth on the couch,
bleeding profusely, most of her head splattered on the wall behind her.
On the blood-sprayed coffee table in front of her was the answering
machine, a ballpoint pen, and several crumpled balls of writing paper.
He stood destroyed before her corpse. How could this have happened? All
he had ever done was lover her. Devastated, he slowly walked over to the
blaring stereo. A CD single of “Without You” was programmed to repeat.
He wondered how many times she’d listened to the same song and shut the
power off. Then he noticed that next to the answering machine was a
note.

Number one with a bullet, the red-speckled note read.

Shaking and convulsing, his tears falling freely, Mayne began screaming
at the top of his lungs. It sounded like someone had unleashed a wild
animal. His shrieks threatened to break the windows. A migraine pierced
his throbbing temples and his entire head was overloaded with pressure.
Did she kill herself because they had failed or because he wouldn’t
leave her be? Was it the song, one of the few things he’d ever done
autonomously, that had driven her to this? Was this really happening?
Then another thought came out mind. He removed the pistol from her hand
and put it against his temple.

He was going to join her.

CLICK.

It was empty. Elizabeth had known she would only need one bullet.

Mayne snapped out of that nightmare and was thrust into another memory.
He recognized the familiar room as the honeymoon suite in Las Vegas and
almost felt at ease. The bed was in disarray and Elizabeth was smiling
mischievously.

“What do you want to do?”

“Wha’?” Mayne responded, confused.

They’d already drunk several bottles of champagne and made love twice.

“What do you want to do?” she replied softly, daring Mayne to answer.

Mayne caught wind of her game and decided to play along. If she was
giving him an option as to what they’d do next, he was definitely going
to take advantage of her generosity.

“You can either come up here and tell me that you love me or go down on
me.”

Elizabeth’s face registered joy. Words like love were the hardest to get
out of Mayne’s mouth. Once again she smiled as she began her descent
toward his waistline. It didn’t take her very long to bring him back to
life. Several minutes later, when she sensed that he was as excited as
he was going to get, Elizabeth looked up at her man and with the sexiest
expression she would conjure, softy said, “I love you.”

Mayne came with a slight grunt. The powerful surge had given him
something to work at but there was no pleasure in the orgasm. There
never was anymore. He tossed the photo album aside and lay on the bed
feeling dead, staring at the ceiling. For a split second, he thought he
heard musical strands of “Without You” but it was only his imagination.
His tired body lay there for what felt like a year before he sat up. At
least the drugs on the night table were real. Everything he needed was
on the table. Hidden beneath the clock radio was a syringe and a
blackened spoon. There was a half-empty glass of water and a lighter
next to it. In the spoon he mixed the proper amounts of heroin and
water, and then, using the lighter, heated the bottom of the spoon until
the mixture cleared up before placing a tiny piece of cotton into the
spoon. With unsteady hands, he added some cocaine and his speedball was
complete. Being a high-profile celebrity, he couldn’t afford to have his
withered arms tracked up too badly. He usually shot into the back of his
forearms or his feet. He also injected into his neck but the way he felt
right now, he had no time to dillydally. Like an expert acupuncturist,
he fixed into a bulging vein in his forearm.

“Cool,” he mumbled, carefully examining his arm,as he felt the speedball
coming on.

| He fell back down on the bed. Between the drugs and his emotions, he
was exhausted. It was a good thing drugs numbed away most of the
pressures. He was rushing out as the drug hit him in powerful waves. It
took several moments before he realized his left arm was touching
something. He slowly rolled over. The photo album was opened to the last
page. The last page contained Elizabeth’s obituary and a sympathy card.
Tears he’d held in since that day began to flow down his cheeks. His
|  pale face flushed as he felt his strength evaporating. He was
drowning in sorrow but didn’t believe in self-pity and that made him
feel even worse. He sat up hyperventilating with a question echoing
inside his head. Why did she have to die? He had no answer and stood up
too quickly. Why was everything so fucked? He went back into the living
room. He needed whiskey.

Why?

He loved her so much.

Why?

He’d offered her half the royalties. Half. That was a financial empire,
but she’d refused.

Why?

| He’d tried to make amends. He’d tried being good according to
society’s standards. He wanted to understand everything that had
happened to them. He wanted her to love him but no matter how hard
|  he tried, he fucked it up.

Why?

He wanted to be normal again but that wasn’t possible.

Why?

He wanted to feel closer to Elizabeth but she was dead. That tormented
his fragile soul but for a split second of insane logic, Mayne concluded
that his body should not be spared either.

“Arrrrrrggghh!” he growled, attacking his living room like a pissed-off
brawler. Fists and feet attacked defenseless walls and furniture. He
cocked his right fist back and a large hole went through plaster. He
snatched an Oriental lamp off an end table and hurled it across the
room. He violently threw a marble ashtray into a plaque, ruining both.
Breathing heavily and drenched in alcoholic sweat, he grabbed a platinum
record and smashed it, spraying glass shards everywhere. The shattered
glass on the floor twinkled like sun-reflected sand. No matter how many
hotel rooms he trashed during his career, Mayne had never harmed a
guitar. That was strictly taboo until today. He walked over to the row
of guitars, grabbed a ‘68 Stratocaster by its stringed neck and swung,
smashing the mahogany body until it was little more than firewood. With
each self-destructive act, he felt slightly better. He walked over to
another platinum disc, readied himself and put his right fist through
the glass. Blood spurted from the hand that was heavily insured by
Lloyds of London.

For the first time that day he smiled.

| Mayne grabbed the Jim Beam bottle off the bar and guzzled. The liquid
painkiller warmed his heaving chest and eased his bleeding hand, which
looked like it needed stitches. He walked over to his Fischer stereo,
and, using his good hand, turned on the receiver. The digital readout
was locked on a classic rock station. It was the only safe station on
the dial, since it never played any of
|  his songs. Mayne Mann was too new, too current. The station only
played material from the 60s and 70s. He instantly recognized the song
playing; it was Humble Pie’s “I Don’t Need No Doctor.” It was raw rock
like this that had inspired him to become a musician. Following the Pie
were the Allman Brothers. Mayne could relate to what it felt like being
tied to a whipping post.

| During the commercials, he went into the kitchen to grab another beer.
Out of his stereo speakers
|  a record store chain announced its prices as the lowest in Los
Angeles. The background music
|  accompanying the record store commercial was “Without You.”

His eyes stung but no tears fell as he realized that no matter where he
was, he couldn’t hide from himself. Like a man on a mission, he walked
over to the stereo, grabbed the receiver, and yanked with both hands. It
took several strong tugs before the digital lights went off. With the
receiver in hand, he stumbled backward, ripping wires and knocking over
one of the large Bose speakers. Distraught and panting, he made his way
to the giant sliding safety glass door that led to the balcony. He
casually dropped the high-tech receiver and undid the latch that kept
the heavy door locked. Fresh air attacked his senses. The cool breeze
felt invigorating as he stepped out onto the balcony and looked over the
edge. His jet-black Bentley sat gleaming in the parking lot directly
below. He picked the receiver up, held it over the balcony, and aimed it
at the car. After several seconds of wondering if his aim was accurate,
he let go. Glass spidered wildly when the receiver hit the car’s
windshield and broke through. He went to fetch the beer he’d been
distracted from and ripped the refrigerator door open as hard as he
could. It crashed open, spilling several items onto the floor. The door
dangled by a hinge. Mayne grabbed a beer, chugged half, and like a
strong-armed baseball pitcher threw it at his guitar collection, barely
missing his favorite: a vintage ‘57 Sunburst Les Paul. He grabbed
another can from the crippled refrigerator as his eyes returned to the
guitars.

The guitars were like adopted children and he loved each one in a
different manner.

Certain guitars held certain memories but each guitar had the ability to
create magic. It was that potential he respected and admired most about
these guitars until this afternoon. Now, no matter how much he loved a
certain guitar, or how valuable it might be, all he wanted to do was
feel pain. Pain brought him closer to reality. It brought him closer to
Elizabeth. He gave the world music, very good music, and asked for
little in return. A little space to create, some kicks thrown in, and
how about peace of mind? Instead, he had more material goods than he
could ever use, more money than he could count, and nothing worth
fighting for. There was a time not too long ago when he’d fought like
hell for all of this. Now that he owned a piece of the rock he wished he
could give it back. The view from the top wasn’t as picturesque as he’d
imagined. What he did as his artistic expression, the record company
sold for capital. He’d quickly grown disillusioned with the system but
what else could he do? Without the industry he couldn’t share his music.
No matter how hard anyone tried explaining it to him, musical notes
would never equal dollar signs. He made music because since his early
childhood, he truly loved rock ‘n’ roll. It was the people, his people,
he wrote music for after he finished writing for himself. So then, why
couldn’t he sleep at night?

He stared at the answer.

He was going to kill his guitars. If it wasn’t for these guitars, he
wouldn’t have the problems he did. And he’s save the goddamn ‘57
Sunburst for last. He guzzled the beer, raising it away from his greedy
mouth. Budweiser rained down the side of his face. When the can was
almost empty, he crushed and spiked it like a football. Enraged, he
grabbed a Les Paul Black Beauty and dealt it a quick but savage death
against a wall. He raised a rare Telecaster over his head and clubbed
the coffee table, breaking both. Then he picked up another Les Paul and,
swinging it like a baseball bat, clobbered a lamp and several other
objects before the guitar’s neck snapped off.

“Fuckin’ cheap shit,” he grumbled.

He heard something that had a bit of rhythm to it. Was there a drummer
playing in his head? It took several seconds for him to realize that one
of the neighbors was pounding on the wall.

| “WHAT, A LITTLE TOO LOUD FOR YA?” Mayne shouted at the direction the
noise was coming from. It
|  didn’t stop.

“YER PISSING ME OFF, ASSHOLE!”

Knock-Knock-Knock-Knock-Knock.

“Motherfucker, I’m giving ya fair fucking warning,” he said.

Knock-Knock-Knock-Knock-Knock.

Mayne walked into the bedroom and over to the night table. He grabbed
his cocaine and poured a decent-sized mound on the back of his hand that
wasn’t bleeding and snorted. Afterward he licked residue off his fist,
numbing his teeth and gums. There was a pack of Marlboros on the table.
He grabbed one and lit it. He took a deep drag and listened to his
surroundings. The neighbor was still pounding. The ashtray was an
overflowing mountain of dead butts so Mayne placed the cigarette on the
edge of the night table. He had tried to avoid a confrontation, but the
shithead next door wouldn’t let it lie. He went to his wall safe,
grabbed the Smith & Wesson .357 Magnum, and charged out of the bedroom.
“OKAY, HOMEFUCK, WANNA PLAY GAMES?”

Knock-Knock-Knock-Knock-Knock.

KABAMMM, KABAMMM, KABAMMM.

He unloaded three shots toward the already hole-ridden wall. The
pounding stopped instantly. Again he smiled. He aimed the pistol at one
of his platinum discs on another wall and blasted the shiny sphere. He
aimed at his TV and blew it to kingdom come. One bullet left. He held
the silver-plated pistol in awe. He could easily join Elizabeth; all it
would take was one quick squeeze of the trigger. The idea appealed to
him. Maybe he’d get it right in his next life. Slowly, eyes closed, he
raised the pistol. The trigger teased his scarlet index finger. The
barrel felt good against his temple. Readying himself, he reopened his
eyes. In front of him, mocking him, were two more Les Paul guitars.
There once was a point in his life when these musical embodiments were
holy. The dedication and years of practicing were a labor of love.
Guitars were his passion, his expression, and his ticket out of
obscurity. But all of that changed with one song. Now these guitars were
reminders that Mayne could never regain his innocence.

“Can’t I fuckin’die with some dignity?” he wondered as rage consumed
him.

He couldn’t even commit suicide without music somehow interfering. His
shaking arm lowered and took aim at one of the guitars. There was heavy
recoil as wooden fragments flew everywhere. He put a massive hole in the
guitar, and then walked over to examine his accuracy. It was definitely
dead, but that wasn’t enough. He picked up the remains and threw them
against the safety-glass door. He walked over to the balcony’s edge.
Below, a small crowd had gathered around his ruined luxury car.

“Anybody want an autograph?” he asked, tossing out the fragmented
guitar.

“Wait a minute, wait a minute. I got another present!” he yelled, and
ran into the bedroom.

His heavy footsteps jarred the cigarette he’d forgotten off the night
table. It smoldered on the thick rug. Mayne dug inside the wall safe,
grabbed a handful of hundred-dollar bills, and ran back to the balcony
before his audience could scurry away.

“Don’t say I never gave you anything,” he announced, letting the money
fly.

Several wary spectators stepped backward but as soon as it was obvious
that the confetti was currency, they rushed forward. Mayne waved to the
small crowd and went back inside.

One guitar remained.

| He stared at the ‘57, marveling at the beautiful colors. It was
appropriately called a Sunburst. Reds, oranges, and yellows swirled in
the wooden body. This one had gold trim as well as golden pickups. The
Sunburst was his preference of all guitars. He had another two dozen in
storage but this guitar was the first thing he bought after Suicide
Shift was signed to a recording contract. It was how he’d rewarded
himself for having “made it.” This was also the guitar he’d written the
music to “Without You” on. He approached it with caution and respect and
gently picked it up. He sat down on the floor Indian style. Deep down,
he was glad he hadn’t destroyed this ax. His
|  picking hand hurt badly, but he wanted to play. Blood dripped off his
hand and dripped down the guitar’s body. Enthralled, Mayne watched it
run. No matter how intoxicated he was, his fingers never betrayed him,
and this particular guitar always responded to his call. He began
picking something that sounded like Hendrix. He paused abruptly.
Something about that last guitar run shook him up and he couldn’t
continue. In a vague way, it reminded him of a part in “Without You.”
After taking a deep breath, Mayne partially regained his composure.
Multimillionaires like Mayne Mann aren’t supposed to cry. They’re beyond
tears or at least that’s what society wants to believe. Mayne Mann was
just Stephen Maynard Mandraich, a talented kid who could run his nimble
fingers along a piece of stringed wood. He began to strum one of his
favorite riffs, Thin Lizzy’s “Don’t Believe a Word.” Even though the
guitar wasn’t amplified, he could hear it as if it was. He let the last
note ring out as he stopped and reflected. He used to love the feel of
this instrument in his hands. He used to love making the strings come to
life. He used to love just holding this guitar. Then his mind viciously
reminded him that he’d also loved the way Elizabeth felt. He quickly
rose off the floor and tossed the guitar aside. It landed with a loud
DWWWAANNNGGGG.

He stared blankly at the guitar and thought of her. Both had given him
so much pleasure, but he’d never been able to properly express his
gratitude. He never told her the truth about how she made him feel,
about how much he loved her, and when he did, the song reaffirmed that
he should’ve kept his mouth shut. At least she’d still be alive. But the
song was pure and he wanted to play it for her. Even if her physical
body wasn’t present, he could still sing to her in heaven. He wanted to
jam but was afraid to touch the guitar.

Then Mayne saw an alternative. He scooped up the almost-dead whiskey
bottle and finished what little was left. It slipped silently from his
hand. Very drunk, very drugged out, he staggered over to the piano. The
smoldering cigarette on the bedroom rug had burned its way over to the
goose-down comforter. The cover caught and flames quickly spread
throughout the bedroom. Discarded clothing acted as kindling and soon
the bedroom was on fire.

Until several hazy hours ago, Mayne’s life, no matter how miserable, had
been something most people could only dream about. It was all an
illusion, and he was one of rock ‘n’ roll’s elite, a hero. Now, he’d
been reduced to his basic self and nothing really mattered. He felt the
thorns wrapped around his heart and for the first time in far too long,
felt human again. He’d smothered his spirituality in drug abuse. He’d
stunted his health and personal growth with vice. He’d blinded himself
because he was afraid to see that his purpose, his gift in life, was to
be true to himself. And the only time he was able to find that inner
truth was when he played his music. He softly tapped the ivory keys,
making melodies come to life through his fingers. No matter how badly
his hand hurt, he persisted in making music. He was determined to play
for Elizabeth and all the other angels. With every fluid run, every
harmony, every musical accent, his inner pain subsided a little. With
each passing musical note, he became one with the music.

Sweating profusely, Mayne felt something stirring behind him. He tried
ignoring it for as long as possible. Finally, he turned and saw large
flames billowing out of his bedroom. At first he thought it was a
hallucination but the fire was scorchingly real and heading his way. His
favorite guitar was already engulfed and dying. He wanted to save it but
couldn’t. He refused to let his jamming be interrupted. Elizabeth was
listening. Every time his fingers pressed the Steinway’s keys, crimson
stained the ivory and smeared. He ignored the small red spots, sliding
his long fingers through them. Scarred-up veins bulged from his forearms
a sweat ran down his face. All he’d ever wanted to do with his life was
play his music and now he was. For the moment, he felt free from his
demons. He built up the courage and began singing “Without You” in his
natural gruff voice. The thick carpeting quickly became a wall-to-wall
inferno as a giant wave of fire rose up and spread around the piano. He
couldn’t have cared less. As flames swallowed the apartment, Mayne never
screamed and never missed a note.

The End

（完）

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2005/12/del_jameswithout_you.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com