.. _200609_winesburg_ohio_by_sherwood_anderson:

舍伍德·安德森的《小镇畸人》（Winesburg, Ohio）
=================================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/09/winesburg_ohio_by_sherwood_anderson.html>`__

前几天，我写了对舍伍德的小说《鸡蛋》的\ `读后感 <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/09/the_egg_by_sherwood_anderson.html>`__\ ，但是我更想谈的其实是舍伍德的小说集《小镇畸人》（Winesburg,
Ohio）。《鸡蛋》写的是农民的悲惨生活，而《小镇畸人》则写了一个更广泛的主题，人生的孤独和无法交流。

我一直没有时间读这本小说集，到今天为止，也才读了3篇（全书一共25篇）。不过，我有一个意外的收获，那就是我发现Irving
Howe为这本小说集写的\ `序言 <http://www.americanliterature.com/WO/WO00.HTML>`__\ 异常精彩，也是masterpiece。有了这篇序言，似乎就没有必要再为这本书写其他评论文字了。

这篇序言不仅是对这本小说集的评论，也是对小说中描写的那一类人物形象的总结，具有典型性的意义。

我挑了一段翻译，希望大家看了会对这部小说集感兴趣。


=====================

舍伍德《小镇畸人》的故事发生地点是美国中部一个叫做Winesburg的小镇。虽然这是小说中很重要的背景，但是你可以说——虽然略带夸张——这本小说其实是”反现实主义”的。所谓”反现实主义”，就是指那类不注重准确的时间地点和社会细节，只注重从高度个人化的角度、甚至不现实的角度描写美国生活的小说。

这本小说中描写的都是狭隘、紧张、几乎患上幽闭恐惧症的人物。这导致这本书的主题与生存的极端状态有关，与男主人公或女主人公的崩溃有关。这些主人公精神不稳定，都生活在社会的边缘，怀着最大的忍耐。

舍伍德展现的是一片悲伤的风景，在那里，怅然若失的灵魂四处出没。这些灵魂往往在夜晚的黑暗中一闪而过，他们的生活都不完整。……这样的人物不像现实主义小说中那样丰满，小说描写的只是一些生命的片断、短暂的凝视、以及经受忍耐和经受失败后的生命残骸。

**在每一篇小说中，主人公出现的时候，不管是羞涩或盲目自信，无不试图去发现同伴和友爱，他们发疯一样地寻求与人沟通。**

**Winesburg小镇上的这些人物，真正的意义不是他们自己种种奇特的行为，而是代表了舍伍德竭力想要表达的那种对情感交流”不可名状的饥渴”。**

附：英语原文

| Although the fact that his stories are set in a mid-American place
like Winesburg does constitute an important formative condition. You
might even say, with only slight overstatement, that what Anderson is
doing in Winesburg, Ohio could be described as “antirealistic,” fictions
notable less for precise locale and social detail than for a highly
personal, even strange vision of American life. Narrow, intense, almost
claustrophobic, the result is a book about extreme states of being, the
collapse of men and women who have lost their psychic bearings and now
hover, at best tolerated, at the edge of the little community in which
they live. It would be a gross mistake, though not one likely to occur
by now, if we were to take Winesburg, Ohio as a social photograph of
“the typical small town” (whatever that might be.) Anderson evokes a
depressed landscape in which lost souls wander about; they make their
flitting appearances mostly in the darkness of night, these stumps and
shades of humanity. This vision has its truth, and at its best it is a
terrible if narrow truth—but it is itself also grotesque, with the tone
of the authorial voice and the mode of composition forming muted signals
of the book’s content. Figures like Dr. Parcival, Kate Swift, and Wash
Williams are not, nor are they meant to be, “fully- rounded” characters
such as we can expect in realistic fiction; they are the shards of life,
glimpsed for a moment, the debris of suffering and defeat. In each story
one of them emerges, shyly or with a false assertiveness, trying to
reach out to companionship and love, driven almost mad by the search for
human connection. In the economy of Winesburg these grotesques matter
less in their own right than as agents or symptoms of that “indefinable
hunger” for meaning which is Anderson’s preoccupation.

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/09/winesburg_ohio_by_sherwood_anderson.html>`__

Evernote

**

Highlight

Remove Highlight

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/09/winesburg_ohio_by_sherwood_anderson.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com