.. _200410_the_great_gatsby:

The Great Gatsby的读书笔记（一）
===================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2004/10/the_great_gatsby.html>`__

The Great
Gatsby是我一直想读，却一直没有读完的书。现在，下决心在今年冬天把它读完。该书的英语非常规范，而且生动，有很高的学习价值。所以决定边学边做笔记。

我认为我所摘录都是很有价值的东西，如果你对英语感兴趣的话，很值得精读哦。在每段下面，我加了一些阅读心得和评语。

下面是第三章后半部分的一些笔记。

1.

The moon had risen higher, and floating in the Sound was a triangle of
silver scales, trembling a little to the stiff, tinny drip of the
banjoes on the lawn.

多迷人的月色啊！

2.

It understood you just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed
in you as you would like to believe in yourself, and assured you that it
had precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to
convey.

最知心的朋友就该是这样。

3.

The large room was full of people. One of the girls in yellow was
playing the piano, and beside her stood a tall, red-haired young lady
from a famous chorus, engaged in song. She had drunk a quantity of
champagne, and during the course of her song she had decided, ineptly,
that everything was very, very sad - she was not only singing, she was
weeping too. Whenever there was a pause in the song she filled it with
gasping, broken sobs, and then took up the lyric again in a quavering
soprano.

The tears coursed down her cheeks - not freely, however, for when they
came into contact with her heavily beaded eyelashes they assumed an inky
color, and pursued the rest of their way in slow black rivulets. A
humorous suggestion was made that she sing the notes on her face,
whereupon she threw up her hands, sank into a chair, and went off into a
deep vinous sleep.

| “She had a fight with a man who says he’s her husband,.” explained a
girl at my
|  elbow. I looked around. Most of the remaining women were now having
fights with men said to be their husbands.

难以想像菲茨杰拉德会写出这么滑稽的段落，看的时候真是把我笑死了。

4.

Most of the time I worked. In the early morning the sun threw my shadow
westward as I hurried down the white chasms of lower New York to the
Probity Trust. I knew the other clerks and young bond-salesmen by their
first names, and lunched with them in dark, crowded restaurants on
little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee. I even had a short
affair with a girl who lived in Jersey City and worked in the accounting
department, but her brother began throwing mean looks in my direction,
so when she went on her vacation in July I let it blow quietly away.

I took dinner usually at the Yale Club - for some reason it was the
gloomiest event of my day - and then I went up-stairs to the library and
studied investments and securities for a conscientious hour.

There were generally a few rioters around, but they never came into the
library, so it was a good place to work. After that, if the night was
mellow, I strolled down Madison Avenue past the old Murray Hill Hotel,
and over 33d Street to the Pennsylvania Station.

唉，这就是一个所谓的坐办公室的白领生活。忙碌而又空虚。

5.

I began to like New York, the racy, adventurous feel of it at night, and
the satisfaction that the constant flicker of men and women and machines
gives to the restless eye. I liked to walk up Fifth Avenue and pick out
romantic women from the crowd and imagine that in a few minutes I was
going to enter into their lives, and no one would ever know or
disapprove.

| Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them to their apartments on the
corners of hidden streets, and they turned and smiled back at me before
they faded rough
|  a door into warm darkness. At the enchanted metropolitan twilight I
felt a haunting loneliness sometimes, and felt it in others - poor young
clerks who loitered in front of windows waiting until it was time for a
solitary restaurant dinner - young clerks in the dusk, wasting the most
poignant moments of night and life.

Again at eight o’clock, when the dark lanes of the Forties were five
deep with throbbing taxi-cabs, bound for the theatre district, I felt a
sinking in my heart. Forms leaned together in the taxis as they waited,
and voices sang, and there was laughter from unheard jokes, and lighted
cigarettes outlined unintelligible gestures inside. Imagining that I,
too, was hurrying toward gayety and sharing their intimate excitement, I
wished them well.

上海和纽约真是有相似的地方。对于我来说，繁华灯火中的孤独就是这个样子。

6.

Dishonesty in a woman is a thing you never blame deeply - I was casually
sorry, and then I forgot.

这句话的意思是不忠诚是女人的天性。虽然很不幸，但这是实话。

7.

I am slow-thinking and full of interior rules that act as brakes on my
desires.

这句话我要背下来，本人就是slow-thinking、full of interior rules、having
brakes on desires的人啊.

8.

Every one suspects himself of at least one of the cardinal virtues, and
this is mine: I am one of the few honest people that I have ever known.

这句话对我也适用。

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2004/10/the_great_gatsby.html>`__

Evernote

**

Highlight

Remove Highlight

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2004/10/the_great_gatsby.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com