.. _200312_post:

一个美国人和他领养的中国孤儿
===============================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2003/12/post.html>`__

我已经记不清楚了，我是如何发现他的\ `网站 <http://www.tussah.com/>`__\ 的。

只记得当时很好奇：一个美国人领养了一个中国女孩，然后又接受邀请到锦州去当英语外教，那会是怎样的经历和感受？他又是怎样看待中国的呢？

|042700.jpg|

于是，我加入了他的邮件列表，通过这个列表，他会不定期地将他的故事告诉网上关心着他的人们。但是很遗憾，自从2001年7月3日以后，他就一封邮件也没有发出过。

直到今天我清理邮件时，才又发现了来自他的新邮件。原来他当上了美国的签证面试官。


===========================================

Hello, everybody!

Since Lara and I returned from China in January, we’ve been settling
back into American routines. This time around, the adjustment was much
easier for both of us. I think we’ve gotten to the point where we feel
comfortable in both places now. We immediately started back into weekly
Chinese school in Tucson, and generally kept busy.

As usual, the miserable economy combined with our very rural location
(on my parents’ ranch in rural SE Arizona) has made it very difficult
for me to find work. So, I sat down and took a good, hard look at where
I’ve been and where I want to go, careerwise. And came to the surprising
conclusion that what I’d really like to do is become a Foreign Service
Officer. Having been on the side of so many students trying to breach
the barriers to get visas to the U.S., it’s a bit strange to imagine
sitting on the other side of the desk and no doubt being required to
turn down lots of visa applicants. But on the other hand, the idea of
having the opportunity to serve my country, perhaps make a real
difference helping people, and live in interesting places around the
world with government support and an American income just overwhelms the
negatives in my mind.

Entry to the Foreign Service is a difficult and drawn out process, and I
am just in the initial stages now. I took the written exam in April. The
results won’t come out until late July. If I pass, then the next step
will be to travel to San Francisco or Chicago for the Oral Assessment.
If I pass that, then there’s the Medical and Security Clearances. In a
best case scenario, I might be hired sometime early next spring. If I
fail in the written or oral exams, then I’ll have to start all over
again next spring.

I am really excited about the chance to live in exotic places all over
the world, and I think Lara will do very well with that sort of
lifestyle, too. She’s really a very easy kid to take along and do things
with, and adapts easily to new situations. I have been told, informally,
that there’s a good chance that our first posting might be to China,
since my Chinese ability has reached an acceptable level. After that,
who knows?

In the meantime, Lara and I are enjoying life in Arizona. A few weeks
ago, a dream project fell into my lap. An east coast software company
found my resume in a web search, and contracted with me to develop
documentation for their webbased financial modeling application. I work
my own hours, from my own home office, doing work that I really enjoy!

Lara’s just finishing up her 2nd grade homeschooling year this month.
She enjoys the flexibility of homeschooling, but misses some of the fun
of having lots of other kids to play with. However, she doesn’t miss
being teased or treated unkindly by the other kids, so all in all,
homeschooling is working well for us all. None of us miss the grueling
bus rides she had to endure traveling 25 miles each way to the nearest
public school.

I’ve been writing to you all erratically, since 1998, when we were first
preparing to move to China, and had no idea what to expect. Our China
adventure has been such a wonderful experience for us both, helping me
especially to broaden my outlook and attitudes about culture, career,
personal priorities, relationships and so many other things. Heck, I
even learned how to cook some wonderful Chinese dishes! When I look back
to my pre-China life, the difference amazes me. Life just keeps getting
better, and definitely more interesting.

I think that one of the things I am most pleased about, though, is that
I have been able to influence and encourage others to create their own
China adventure. What a pleasure it has been, to read other China
diaries, and see China through their eyes!

At this point, I don’t know when we’ll be able to return to China. I am
sure that we will. I’ll continue to post occasionally to this list,
whenever Yahoo threatens to delete my group, or whenever something
noteworthy occurs in our lives. Please, please, for those of you
planning your own adventures in life, be sure to invite me to join YOUR
list, too!

Yours,

Lisa McClure

`http://www.tussah.com/ <http://www.tussah.com/>`__

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2003/12/post.html>`__

Evernote

**

Highlight

Remove Highlight

.. |042700.jpg| image:: http://home.bomoo.com/mt-archives/images/042700.jpg

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2003/12/post.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com