.. _200703_whats_a_healthy_family:

英语作文：What’s a Healthy Family
====================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2007/03/whats_a_healthy_family.html>`__

整理废纸的时候，发现一篇好几年以前读研究生时的英语作文
《什么是健康的家庭》（What’s a Healthy Family）
。当时的英语课规定每两周交一篇小作文。我差不多已经都忘了。

重读一遍，我感到很惭愧。没有文采倒也算了，主要是我写命题作文——不管中文或英文——总是写出这种文笔枯涩、挤牙膏式的东西。当年，老师的评分是12分，而满分是20分……

这些年，少有机会用英语写东西，我的英语写作想必提高也是寥寥无几，以后必须多练习了。


================================

**What’s a Healthy Family**

A family is the smallest unit in society. The roots of many social
problems are within the families. So a healthy family not only is good
for every member of hers, but also makes valuable contribution to the
social harmony.

Wherever in the world, people have some common views about what a
healthy family is. For instance, we all think that love is the most
important link within a family. Yesterday, I read an article in the
newspaper about Director Zhang Yi-Mou’s new movie “My father and
mother”. The article said many Australians shed their tears when they
saw the movie. These people said that they were moved deeply by the true
love of two common Chinese in 1950s. I think the article showed us that
the audience of the Orient and the West have the same feeling to the
unbreakable love and responsibilities between a man and a woman.

In my views, I think that a healthy family is a synthetic individual
unit which can contain every member’s different opinions. A healthy
family is not only a system of sharing responsibility, but also a system
of individual freedom. It not only respects for each other’s privacy,
but also makes every member understand each other’s circumstances. It
has the ability to bring quarrels to a quick and satisfying conclusion
rather than to suppress the quarrels by a patriarch. It gives every
child clear parental guidelines on the right and the wrong, not
imperious orders. It produces easy interaction among all family members
and attaches great importance to all family members’ independence.

The End

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2007/03/whats_a_healthy_family.html>`__

Evernote

**

Highlight

Remove Highlight

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2007/03/whats_a_healthy_family.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com