.. _200604_rule_by_law:

《纽约时报》系列报道：《依法治国》之一（Rule by Law）
========================================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/04/rule_by_law.html>`__

4月19日，2006年度的普利策新闻奖公布了。其中的国际报道奖授予了《纽约时报》的两位记者，他们的作品是一组报道中国司法制度现状、名为《依法治国》（Rule
by Law）的系列报道，一共8篇。

这一组报道，以及他们这次得奖的消息，在中国是不被提及的。

以下，我将连载这8篇系列报道。

虽然我很想把它们全部译成中文，但是因为原报道较长，我又没有时间，所以每篇我只译出开头部分，剩下的请大家自己阅读英文。借助字典，它们并不难读懂。

下面是这组系列报道的第一篇。


===============================

**中国的法庭：缺乏正义和根深蒂固的缺陷**

作者： JOSEPH KAHN

原载于2005年9月21日《纽约时报》

安阳，中国 －
三天三夜了，警察将秦延洪的手臂高高的反拧在背后，将他的膝盖塞到一个锋利的金属架子中，要是他睡着了就踢他肚子。痛苦是如此剧烈，他看见汗水从脸上不断流出来，在地板上形成了一片水渍。

第四天，他屈服了。”她的裤子是什么颜色？”他们问。”黑的，”他喘息着说，立刻感到后脑被重击了一下。”红的，”他叫道，又是一下。”蓝的，”他什么也不管了。殴打停止了。

秦延洪是河南省一个35岁的钢铁厂工人。上面是他回忆，如何在一个黑暗的审讯室中被诱供关于一起强奸谋杀案的细节。当他向警察”供认”了结案所需的供词时，对他的拷打就结束了。

只根据他被逼迫的供词，没有其他证据，检察官就起诉了秦延洪。接着，法庭宣判他有罪，判处他死刑。他之所以今天还活着，完全是由于一起极偶尔的事件，证明了他的清白，迫使当局不得不将他释放。即使如此，在最后关头当局依然想尝试对他执行死刑。

司法过程在中国进行得很快，但是缺乏准确性。犯罪调查几乎都是以定罪告终。检察官几乎从来不会败诉。但是，最近揭露的像秦延洪那样的错误的判决，暴露出了中国司法体制中根深蒂固的缺陷。这个体制主要向政治领导人负责，而不是向法律负责。

（以下翻译略，但网上有\ `参考译文一 <http://blog.sohu.com/members/wangxiaoshan/2329180.html>`__\ ，\ `参考译文二 <http://www.google.com/search?hl=zh-CN&q=%E7%A7%A6%E4%B8%A5%E5%AE%8F&btnG=Google+%E6%90%9C%E7%B4%A2&lr=>`__\ ，\ `参考译文三 <http://www.google.com/search?hl=zh-CN&newwindow=1&q=%E7%A7%A6%E5%BB%B6%E6%B4%AA&btnG=%E6%90%9C%E7%B4%A2&lr=>`__\ ）

插图一：1998年秦延洪在警察的逼迫下，承认犯有杀人罪，被判处死刑。他于2002年被释放。

插图二：秦延洪的案件，由三个法官组成的刑事庭在安阳县封闭审判。安阳县公安局信访接待大厅门口挂有标语：”人人受到局长接待，件件得到依法处理”。

插图三：在安阳县对秦延洪的审判中，起诉方检察院并没有目击证人。

**Deep Flaws, and Little Justice, in China’s Court System**

| By JOSEPH KAHN
|  Published: September 21, 2005

ANYANG, China - For three days and three nights, the police wrenched Qin
Yanhong’s arms high above his back, jammed his knees into a sharp metal
frame, and kicked his gut whenever he fell asleep. The pain was so
intense that he watched sweat pour off his face and form puddles on the
floor.

On the fourth day, he broke down. “What color were her pants?” they
demanded. “Black,” he gasped, and felt a whack on the back of his head.
“Red,” he cried, and got another punch. “Blue,” he ventured. The beating
stopped.

This is how Mr. Qin, a 35-year-old steel mill worker in Henan Province
in central China, recalled groping in the darkness of a interrogation
room to deduce the “correct” details of a rape and murder, end his
torture and give the police the confession they required to close a
nettlesome case.

On the strength of his coerced confession alone, prosecutors indicted
Mr. Qin. A panel of judges then convicted him and sentenced him to
death. He is alive today only because of a rare twist of fate that
proved his innocence and forced the authorities to let him go, though
not before a final push to have him executed anyway.

Justice in China is swift but not sure. Criminal investigations nearly
always end in guilty pleas. Prosecutors almost never lose cases brought
to trial. But recent disclosures of wrongful convictions like Mr. Qin’s
have exposed deep flaws in a judicial system that often answers more to
political leaders than the law.

“Our public security system is the product of a dictatorship,” Mr. Qin
wrote his family when he was on death row. “Police use dictatorial
measures on anyone who resists them. Ordinary people have no way to
defend themselves.”

The viability of China’s Communist Party depends more than ever on its
ability to create a credible legal system. The party needs the law to
check corruption, which has eroded its legitimacy. The authorities want
people to turn to the courts, rather than take to the streets, to
resolve social discontents that have made the country more volatile than
at any time since the 1989 democracy movement.

The law, in other words, has become a front line in China’s struggle to
modernize under one-party rule. Yet Mr. Qin’s persecution and similar
miscarriages of justice that have come to light this year suggest that
China is struggling with a fundamental question of jurisprudence: Do
officials serve the law, or do laws serve the officials? Or, to put it
another way, is the Communist Party creating rule of law or rule by law?

Twenty-seven years after Deng Xiaoping declared at the outset of China’s
economic reforms, that “the country must rely on law,” the Communist
Party realizes that it cannot effectively govern a thriving
market-oriented economy unless people trust in law. Hundreds of
thousands of new lawyers, stronger courts and a blizzard of
Western-inspired codes protect property, enforce contracts and limit
police powers.

Disgruntled peasants, displaced urban homeowners and newly wealthy
entrepreneurs demand that the authorities respect constitutional rights
long treated as notional. Even inside the system, some policemen,
prosecutors and judges have tried making the law into a more independent
force.

But the transition has been arduous, and the outcome remains uncertain.
Beijing draws the line at legal challenges to senior officials or
important government agencies. The courts rarely if ever rule in favor
of political protesters. Even in business cases, political influence
often proves decisive.

Criminal law poses one of the biggest challenges - and most pointed
sources of discontent. The police and courts still rely mainly on
pretrial confessions and perfunctory court proceedings to resolve
criminal cases instead of the Western tradition of analyzing forensic
evidence and determining guilt through contentious court trials.

China’s criminal laws forbid torture and require judges to weigh
evidence beyond a suspect’s confession. But lawyers and legal scholars
say forced confessions remain endemic in a judicial system that faces
pressure to maintain “social stability” at all costs.

The police and government officials in Anyang, the northern Henan county
seat where Mr. Qin was interrogated, and authorities in Zhengzhou, the
provincial capital, declined repeated written requests to discuss his
case.

But Mr. Qin, his family members and several people involved in his
defense said the case showed how political motives and collusion among
police, prosecutors and the courts could make the law a source of terror
for people who lack the power or money to defend themselves.

A Suspect Investigation

Just after noon on Aug. 3, 1998, Jia Hairong, a 30-year-old peasant
woman, was found murdered on her family’s farm in the village of
Donggaoping, an hour’s drive from Anyang, according to court documents.
Her pants had been cut off with a razor blade. She was raped and
strangled, her body stashed behind tall cornstalks.

The police found a plastic alarm clock and the razor blade at the scene.
They determined that both items were stolen from a nearby home just
before the assault.

Court documents do not make clear whether physical evidence -
fingerprints, blood, semen, traces of clothing - could have identified
the killer. If there were such forensic leads, they were not followed.

Instead, the police relied on the accounts of three children who were
playing outdoors in Qinxiaotun, a village about a mile east of
Donggaoping, the records show. The children recalled seeing Mr. Qin, who
lives in Qinxiaotun, walking from the direction of Donggaoping that
afternoon.

Around midnight on Aug. 4, four officers arrived at the steel plant
where Mr. Qin worked nights and took him away for questioning.

Mr. Qin is a tall, shy, doe-eyed man who rarely travels farther than a
bicycle ride from his dirt-floored village home. When he speaks -
friends say he generally speaks only when spoken to - he has a heavy
local accent that even Anyang residents have trouble understanding.

The police would not tell him why he was being detained. But through the
early morning hours, he was told to detail how he spent Aug. 1 to 3, and
especially the afternoon of Aug. 3. He said he had stayed at home that
day before going to work at night.

After the police said a witness told them that he walked through the
village that afternoon he amended his story, recalling that he visited
the family farm, a short distance from home, to fertilize the fields.

“The farmland is close, so it is not like leaving home,” Mr. Qin said
later. “But they thought they had caught me lying.”

He was handcuffed and shackled. He still had no idea what he was
suspected of doing. But he overheard some officers and drivers
discussing a local murder. He wondered if his detention had some
connection.

“I kept asking them what this was all about,” Mr. Qin said. “No one
would tell me.”

A senior detective named Shen Jun took charge of his interrogation,
court documents show. Mr. Qin described Mr. Shen’s approach as polite,
even conciliatory at first. The detective said he was investigating the
theft of an alarm clock. He said Mr. Qin’s fingerprints matched those
found on the clock.

“He said it was a cheap little alarm clock and that there was no reason
to lie,” Mr. Qin said. “I should just confess. “Then everyone could go
home.”

Mr. Qin said he hoped his detention really was prompted by a petty
theft. But instinct told him not to admit stealing something he did not
steal. So the pressure intensified.

Mr. Shen organized four teams of two policemen each. The teams
interrogated Mr. Qin in consecutive six-hour shifts, day and night, for
three days.

The questioning quickly turned to torture. Mr. Qin said he was made to
sit for many hours on the open metal frame of a chair without a back.
His feet and arms were strapped to the chair legs and his body slumped
through the frame, forcing the backs of his knees and his lower back
against the sharp edges. The technique is known as “tiger stool.”

Alternately, Mr. Qin’s hands were handcuffed behind his back and cinched
up until they were above his head and his arms felt as though they would
separate from his shoulders. This was referred to as “taking a jet
plane.”

He described the pain as piercing. But he said he suffered even greater
agony from lack of sleep. The police poured frigid water on his head and
pounded him awake when he nodded off. They referred to this as “circling
the pig.” By his third day in detention, he said, he felt delirious.

“It would take a superman to resist,” he recalled.

Finally, pressed to specify the color of the stolen alarm clock, he made
a guess: “White.” An officer whacked his head and asked again, “What
color was the clock?” “Red,” he offered, but he got another blow. Then
he said, “Green.” The beating stopped.

Soon thereafter, Mr. Shen told Mr. Qin his theft of the alarm clock
proved he had killed Ms. Jia. The police now had all the evidence they
needed, he said, but Mr. Qin must cooperate fully to avoid the harshest
punishment. That meant he must volunteer every detail of the crime,
three times over, and confess a complete narrative.

Still dazed, Mr. Qin hazarded guesses to every question - was she
wearing shorts or long pants? did he strangle her with his hands or with
a rope? - until he was allowed to sleep.

In the eight months between his arrest and his trial, Mr. Qin wrote a
series of anguished letters home, urging his family to disregard the
charges.

“Every word of the confession is a joke,” he wrote in one letter to his
older brother in early 1999. “To this day, I have no idea what the
victim looks like, and I certainly didn’t know the color of her pants.”

Unwavering Conviction

In prison, Mr. Qin tutored himself in criminal law. His letters cited
passages that he felt would aid his defense. Article 38 of the Chinese
Constitution forbids extracting confessions by torture and “frame-ups.”
Article 46 of the 1996 revised Criminal Procedure Law declares that
“oral confessions” are not sufficient grounds for conviction. Article 12
mandates that suspects must be presumed innocent until proven guilty.

His anger convinced his older brother, Qin Yanqing, who became his
tireless champion. The elder Mr. Qin petitioned legal officials in
Anyang and Zhengzhou to review the case. He exhausted the family savings
on travel and lawyer fees.

He even sought out Mr. Shen. But the detective expressed unwavering
conviction.

“I stake my 20 years of leadership experience as a guarantee,” the elder
Mr. Qin quoted Mr. Shen as telling him. “If your brother did not commit
this crime, then I will accept punishment.”

When the trial opened in April 1999, 50 relatives and villagers went to
Anyang to testify on Mr. Qin’s behalf. But the three-judge panel ordered
the trial closed and excluded them from the courtroom, villagers said.

The prosecution brought no witnesses, and Mr. Qin said the judges
prevented him from calling any. Mr. Qin vigorously recanted his
confession. His lawyer argued that the prosecution’s case, which
depended wholly on the confession, was invalid. The trial was over
before lunch.

Six months later, a judge visited Mr. Qin in prison and delivered the
verdict: Mr. Qin was guilty of rape and murder, and would be executed.
Mr. Qin had a right to appeal.

On death row, his cell contained 15 people and one toilet. He said that
in his two years there, a dozen cellmates were escorted away in the
early morning hours and executed with a bullet to the back of the head.

He was spared that fate not by his appeals, or by new DNA evidence, but
by a stroke of luck that might count as a miracle.

One day in January 2001, a retired soldier named Yuan Qiufu walked into
a police station in Linzhou, a town not far from Anyang, and told the
officer on duty that he had raped, robbed and strangled 18 women. He
provided voluminous details of his killing rampage that included an
unerring account of the rape and murder of Ms. Jia and the theft of a
green alarm clock.

Reversal of Fortune

Even in the world’s most populous country, such definitive exonerations
are not common. But this year alone about a dozen similar reversals of
fortune have come to light, suggesting that legal officials and the
state media are paying more attention to problems in the judicial system
- and that such problems run deep.

For example, last May, She Xianglin, a 39-year-old former security guard
in Hubei Province, was released from jail after serving 11 years when
his wife, whom he was convicted of murdering, returned for a visit. In
1994, she had run away and remarried in another province. The police
decided that a body they found must be the wife’s and that Mr. She must
have killed her.

In June, a 30-year-old laborer in Shanxi Province was released from
custody after a boy he confessed to killing and dumping into the Yellow
River last year came back home. The boy had migrated to a city to find
work.

In July, three police officers in Yunnan Province were convicted of
torturing a man into saying he killed a prostitute. The man had been
scheduled to go to trial for murder in 2002 when someone else admitted
committing the crime.

Official statistics show such abuses are numerous. The Supreme People’s
Procuratorate, China’s Justice Department, said in July that 4,645
criminal suspects had suffered human rights violations, including
torture during inquisitions, in the previous 12 months.

Top officials are pushing to improve criminal procedures. Some legal
scholars say one measure under consideration could give suspects the
right to have a lawyer present during interrogations.

But such changes, if they come, will take time. China’s Communist
Party-run legislature has been urged to consider many new protections,
like a right to remain silent. But such proposals have gone nowhere
because the police steadfastly oppose them.

The last time the government overhauled criminal law procedures, in
1996, it toughened an existing ban on forced confessions, while
declaring that suspects were entitled to a presumption of innocence. The
current publicity campaign effectively acknowledges that the 1996 rules
did not have the desired effect.

One obstacle is China’s long history, in which criminal law was viewed
as an extension of the power of the emperor rather than an objective
code that applies to everyone. Confession amounted to a submission to
authority, while a plea of innocence was viewed as a form of rebellion.

The legal code of the Tang Dynasty, for example, specified that guilt
could only be finally assigned through confession, and that cases could
not be officially recorded without a confession.

Li Bin, a defense lawyer and former government prosecutor in Yunnan, who
was involved in the trial of the three policemen on charges of forcing a
confession, said the problem was systemic.

In China’s top-down political system, the police, prosecutors and judges
respond mostly to incentives from above, Mr. Li said. They pay a much
higher price for failing to maintain the appearance of social order than
for torturing suspects, he said.

“The judicial system is set up to protect the authority of the
government,” he said. “It is not set up to protect the rights of
suspects.”

‘No Hard Feelings’

The disclosure that Mr. Yuan, the serial killer, had murdered Ms. Jia
set off alarm bells among Anyang officials. But the concern was the
possibility that the wrongful arrest, prosecution and conviction of Mr.
Qin could damage careers, Mr. Qin’s family members and an investigator
in the case who is based in Beijing said.

The officials’ response was to suppress the new information - and keep
Mr. Qin on death row.

The investigator talked to the local officials involved, but asked to
remain anonymous because of restrictions on speaking with reporters. He
said that the authorities in Linzhou, who were handing the case of Mr.
Yuan, and those in Anyang, responsible for Mr. Qin’s incarceration,
agreed between themselves to keep the crucial part of Mr. Yuan’s
confession secret. Mr. Yuan would be prosecuted for 17 murders instead
of 18, leaving Mr. Qin’s conviction intact.

“Their attitude was that if my brother was released, 20 officials would
suffer,” said Qin Yanqing, Mr. Qin’s elder brother. “But if he was
executed, only one person would suffer.”

The agreement held for more than a year. It came to light only after an
official in Linzhou joked about the matter to a reporter for a national
legal affairs publication. Although the reporter did not publish an
article on the subject, he did alert authorities in the capital, who
ordered an inquiry.

In May 2002, a provincial-level legal investigation determined that Mr.
Qin should be released. He was given a suite at a hotel. The Anyang
County police organized a banquet.

“When I got back to my room, I cried and cried,” he said. “I could not
control myself.”

A few days after his release, Mr. Qin went to the county police station
and demanded to see Mr. Shen. The detective rushed out of a meeting to
greet him, shaking his hand and apologizing profusely, Mr. Qin recalled.

“He said my case had been a severe lesson for them all,” he said.

But whether they treated it that way is unclear. It took Mr. Qin and his
brother several months to negotiate compensation. Local authorities
eventually agreed to the equivalent of $35,000 in damages for four years
of incarceration on false charges.

But the payment came with strict conditions. Mr. Qin had to agree not to
talk about the matter with the news media or to petition higher
authorities for more money.

He initially accepted those terms. But he broke the pledge this year, he
said, because the authorities had refused to fully exonerate him.
Although he has a notice from the police confirming that he was arrested
in error, the notice attributes the arrest to a “work mistake.” Mr. Qin
has never been declared innocent of murder.

“They hope they can just make this disappear with no hard feelings and
no problems for anyone involved,” he said.

The last time Mr. Qin visited the police to press for a full
restitution, he discovered that Mr. Shen had been promoted. He is no
longer a detective team leader, but Anyang County’s deputy chief of
police.

（完）

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/04/rule_by_law.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com