.. _200604_rule_by_law_1:

《纽约时报》系列报道：《依法治国》之二（Rule by Law）
========================================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/04/rule_by_law_1.html>`__

**商业纠纷将美国企业家送进中国法律的无间道**

作者： JOSEPH KAHN

原载2005年11月1日《纽约时报》

北京，10月31日 —— 季龙粉（David
Ji）是一个美籍华裔的电子企业家。有二个月，他整晚都在拘留所接受审问，但他拒不配合，偶尔还会出言讽刺，使得审讯官大怒。

就这样，在去年12月底——根据一个目击者整理的记录——看守掏空了他的口袋，脱掉他的鞋袜，扯掉他衬衫上的纽扣。他光着脚，衣冠不整的被带进赵勇的办公室。赵勇是四川长虹电器公司的总裁，季龙粉以前的商业伙伴，现在的命运主宰者。

“你要想出去，就得做长虹希望你做的事。”赵勇告诉他，”如果我要你今天死，那你不会活到明天。”

| 插图一：工人们走进绵阳市的长虹电器公司上班。长虹原来是一家军工企业，现在是上市公司，主要股东是绵阳市市政府和四川省省政府。

很快，季龙粉同意与长虹合作。但是，距离中国警察在他商务旅行的酒店中逮捕他，已经一年过去了，他依然还在中国，充当一起与长虹有关的商业纠纷的抵押品。他的同事说他就是一个人质。长虹是中国最大的电视机制造商，而季龙粉的电子设备贸易公司位于洛杉矶，名为APEX数码。

几个星期以来，长虹一直拒绝采访，只是声称APEX欠它4.7亿美元。APEX曾经帮助长虹成为沃尔玛、Best
Buy和Circuit
City的廉价电视机和DVD播放机的供应商。APEX则说，它只欠长虹1.5亿美元。虽然两者声称的金额相差巨大，但是这个案件最引人注目的地方是，长虹——这家四川省的大型国有企业——为达到追回欠款的目的，动员了警察、检察院、法院的所有力量来为它服务。

中国已经吸收了几千亿美元的外资，成为了世界第三大贸易体。但是它的法律体系进步的速度却要慢得多，即使在处理与政治无关的商业案件时，依然很少支持与政府利益相悖的投资者和普通公民。

（以下翻译略）

插图二：长虹电器公司共有36000个雇员，是绵阳市主要的税收来源。

插图三：季龙粉（左）去年在上海的住处被监视居住。该住处为长虹电器公司所有。

插图四：季龙粉是APEX数码的共同的创立者之一，目前被指控诈骗。

插图五：长虹电器公司的总裁赵勇，曾是季龙粉的商业伙伴。他声称季龙粉欠长虹4.7亿美元。


=====================================

**Dispute Leaves U.S. Executive in Chinese Legal Netherworld**

By JOSEPH KAHN

BEIJING, Oct. 31 - David Ji, a Chinese-American electronics
entrepreneur, spent two months in custody enduring all-night
interrogation sessions, but his stubbornness and occasional flashes of
sarcasm infuriated his Chinese captors.

So in late December last year, according to a person who compiled a
record of the encounter, guards emptied his pockets, removed his shoes
and socks, and ripped the buttons off his oxford shirt. He was ushered
disheveled and barefoot into the office of Zhao Yong, the chief
executive of Sichuan Changhong Electric, Mr. Ji’s onetime business
partner and, more recently, his warden.

“Your only way out is to do what Changhong tells you to do,” Mr. Zhao
told him. “If I decide today I want you to die, you will be dead
tomorrow.”

Mr. Ji soon agreed to cooperate with Changhong. But a year after the
Chinese police apprehended him in his hotel room during a business trip,
he remains in China as a pawn - Mr. Ji’s colleagues say a hostage - in a
commercial dispute that pits Changhong, China’s largest television
manufacturer, against Apex Digital, Mr. Ji’s electronics trading company
based in Los Angeles.

Changhong, which declined repeated requests for comment over several
weeks, claims that Apex owes it $470 million. Apex, which recruited
Changhong to supply Wal-Mart, Best Buy and Circuit City with inexpensive
television sets and DVD players, says it owes less than $150 million.
The sums involved are large, but what is more significant about the case
is the way Changhong, a major state-owned company in Sichuan Province,
deployed the police, prosecutors and judges in a campaign to collect its
debt.

China has attracted hundreds of billions of dollars in foreign
investment and has become the world’s third largest trading power. But
its legal system, even when handling nonpolitical business cases, has
progressed far more haltingly and still rarely backs investors or
ordinary citizens against the state.

Difficulty enforcing contracts, rampant violations of copyrights and
trademarks and protection of domestic industry champions have heightened
trade tensions at a time when China is struggling to convince the
outside world that its growing economic might poses no threat. Beijing
is under heavy pressure to embrace global legal norms with the same
fervor with which it has pursued foreign trade.

Courts and arbitration panels do resolve many business conflicts that
arise from China’s thriving market-oriented economy, and they can rule
professionally and impartially. But when the fate of powerful companies
like Changhong, which has 36,000 employees, lies in the balance, the
judicial system does not act independently and offers no recourse for
outsiders like Mr. Ji.

Ultimately, some legal scholars argue, China’s legal system may not
improve markedly until central and local government officials relinquish
some control and stop putting short-term political goals, like
protecting influential companies and suppressing dissent, above the law.

Mr. Ji and his Los Angeles-based partner, Ancle Hsu, are ethnic Chinese
who became American citizens. They helped Changhong break into the
American market, and its products outsold Sony and Panasonic, heralding
China’s arrival as an electronics powerhouse.

Relations with Changhong soured, however, over quality control problems
and unpaid debts. And when they did, Changhong’s first response was not
to file a lawsuit, but to dispatch the police.

The police from Mianyang, the city in southwestern Sichuan province
where Changhong has its headquarters, apprehended Mr. Ji in Shenzhen,
near Hong Kong, on Oct. 23, 2004. He entered a legal netherworld in
which Changhong decided where he would be held in custody, when to
interrogate him, and how he could help Changhong take over Apex,
according to court documents, video recordings, and taped witness
accounts compiled by people sympathetic to Mr. Ji. The records, which
were also submitted to the State Department, were obtained independently
by The New York Times.

Mianyang is a company town. The legal ambiguity partly reflects the
tight bond between local corporate and government officials. It also
reflects a risk of doing business in China that applies mainly to ethnic
Chinese, dozens of whom have faced criminal charges after falling out
with government-backed business partners. Overseas Chinese are often
treated as subject to local authority regardless of their country of
citizenship.

But in this case, Changhong did not act like a rogue. It solicited and
received financial and political support from the most senior levels of
the central government, according to lawyers involved in the matter.

Changhong’s executives said they could not discuss a pending legal
matter. But Jack C. Auspitz, a lawyer with Morrison & Foerster in New
York who represents Changhong in an ongoing court case against Apex,
said the California company repeatedly failed to pay for goods Changhong
delivered. He said that he did not have detailed information about Mr.
Ji’s conditions in Chinese custody, but that he had no reason to believe
that he had been coerced.

The Chinese police accused Mr. Ji of fraud for writing bad checks to
Changhong and have threatened to prosecute him. He has been released on
a form of bail, with heavy restrictions on his freedom, while
negotiations with Apex proceed. That has left the impression that his
legal fate depends on debt talks between the companies.

“We have been doing business there for many years but could never
imagine something like this happening,” said Mr. Hsu, Mr. Ji’s partner,
in a recent interview. “They have turned a commercial dispute into a
hostage situation and a human rights issue.”

Trial and Error

Changhong and Apex seemed, for a time, a brilliant match.

The American company spotted the potential of the DVD player to replace
the VCR in American living rooms if the price came down. Japanese makers
dominated sales in the late 1990’s, but often charged $400 or more,
making it a luxury item. Apex thought that with the right Chinese
partner it could change that.

The job fell to Mr. Ji, 53, who is also known by his Chinese name, Ji
Longfen. He was born in Jiangsu Province in eastern China and learned
English at Fudan University in Shanghai before emigrating to California.
There he and Mr. Hsu, a native of Taiwan, sold scrap metal and car
radios before testing the DVD market.

Retiring by American standards, Mr. Ji projects a polite deference that
plays well in China. He wears his hair in a starchy wave, a style
popular among Chinese officials. He toured industrial zones and small
township enterprises for partners, a trial-and-error process that
produced some embarrassing failures. A worker in one plant altered a
chip on an Apex DVD player to make a message appear on the screen if a
user loaded an X-rated film: “You dirty old man!”

Changhong, once a big defense contractor and now a publicly traded
electronics maker, seemed more professional. The company, though
majority owned by the Mianyang city and Sichuan provincial governments,
had entrepreneurial drive. Under Ni Rongfen, its chief executive,
Changhong became China’s top television maker. It had its sights set on
the American market.

Mr. Ji and Mr. Ni struck a deal in 2001. In the Chinese style, the
agreement consisted of a simple three-page purchase order.

Changhong was not Apex’s only vendor, but it rapidly became its largest.
Its bulk production brought the retail price of its DVD players at
Wal-Mart and Circuit City down to $59. In 2002, Apex became the top
brand of DVD player in the United States.

Apex also began selling Changhong-made television sets and got the cost
of a 27-inch color model below $100, a record. The company’s total sales
hit $1 billion in 2002 and nearly $2 billion in 2003.

But the two companies were on a collision course. Changhong received far
less from its American sales than it initially recorded on its books.
Fast growth covered that deficit for a time, but the Chinese company
later claimed that half of what it sold ended up as unpaid debt.

The companies have different explanations of what happened. Apex says
Changhong mismanaged its business, basing production on price forecasts
that proved overly optimistic. It also did not time its shipments well,
saddling Apex with high storage costs, the company says. Worse, the
California company claims, Changhong provided low-quality goods,
including a ill-fated foray into rear-projection televisions, which left
Apex to deal with dissatisfied customers and defective products.

Changhong executives have told the Chinese news media that Apex played
tricks with its vendors. It persuaded them to finance their own
production and wait months for payment. Payments often lagged behind
badly, raising suspicions of fraud.

Two other Chinese electronics makers, the Hongtu High Technology Company
and the Tianjin Tiancai Company, say Apex owes them money. A third
supplier, the China Minmetals Corporation, recently settled a dispute
with Apex in arbitration.

Whatever the root causes of the dispute, Apex and Changhong initially
tried to keep things on track, including by taking steps that came back
to haunt Mr. Ji.

In early 2003, as debts piled up, Mr. Ni, the Changhong boss, came under
pressure to explain the shortfall. He leaned on Mr. Ji, who wrote 37
company checks totaling $85 million. Apex said the checks, which do not
bear the markings of having been deposited, were meant as promissory
notes. It said it honored them and more by paying Changhong $370 million
later in 2003.

Even so, Changhong’s debt load worsened and its stock price plunged.
Chinese state-run banks stopped advancing loans, Chinese news media
reports said. That prompted a boardroom coup against Mr. Ni last summer.
He was replaced by Zhao Yong, the deputy mayor of Mianyang.

Shortly after he took office, Mr. Zhao sent a mission to Apex’s
headquarters to demand payment of $470 million, a figure Apex claimed
was three times what it owed. The business relationship froze.

Apex still had a sizable business in China. In October 2004, Mr. Ji
visited to oversee progress on a Wal-Mart order for portable DVD
players. He ignored warnings of a colleague at Apex, who felt the
dispute with Changhong had reached a dangerous impasse, and decided to
contact Changhong during the trip. He told his family he would be back
in a week.

Mr. Ji phoned Changhong after he arrived and said he would like to meet
Mr. Zhao after attending to business in Shenzhen. He hung up thinking
that a dinner appointment had been arranged.

“I felt very happy because I thought the problem would finally be
resolved by one person,” Mr. Ji told a colleague.

Pursuit and Capture

Just after breakfast on Oct. 23, he answered his door at the Grand
Skylight Hotel in Shenzhen. Seven men in civilian clothes identified
themselves as police officers from Sichuan, 500 miles to the west. They
interrogated Mr. Ji for most of the day. He was told he had committed
fraud, though the charges were not spelled out and they had no warrant,
according to the account compiled by people sympathetic with him.

Late that afternoon, Mr. Ji was taken to a private dining room, where a
Changhong executive played host for a banquet, complete with champagne
and abalone. The Changhong executive raised his glass to the policemen,
congratulating them on their “pursuit and apprehension” of Mr. Ji.

Mr. Ji objected, saying he had never been on the run, according to the
record of his detention. He was told not to speak for the rest of the
meal.

The officers then took him to the airport for a flight to Sichuan.
Changhong purchased all eight seats in the first-class section, so the
group had the cabin to itself.

In Sichuan, he was handed over to Changhong. The company cordoned off a
floor in one of its guesthouses and barred the windows, a makeshift
jail. Guards kept watch. A television was left blaring day and night.
For four days, Mr. Ji barely slept.

On the fifth day, he was put on the phone with a lawyer named Charlie
Wang, known as Wang Xiaolin in Chinese, of Cadwalader, Wickersham &
Taft, a white-shoe American law firm that Changhong had retained. Mr.
Wang, who was based in Washington, D.C., told Mr. Ji that he had
committed fraud and that his only way out was to sign documents that
would help Changhong recover missing funds. Exhausted and afraid, Mr. Ji
agreed to study the documents, the record of his detention says.

He was then presented with a stack of legal papers the size of a
mini-bar. They pledged all of Apex’s assets, real property, trademarks
and bank accounts as well as Mr. Ji’s personal assets to settle the
claimed $470 million debt. The documents granted Changhong power of
attorney to review Apex’s books and remove Mr. Hsu from his position. In
effect, he signed away his stake of Apex to Changhong.

Mr. Ji initially balked. A guard then asked, “Do you want this pen, or
do you want your hand?” The guard made a motion of chopping off his
hand. Mr. Ji took the pen.

‘Business as Usual’

Changhong then began an attempt to take over Apex, Apex officials and
the record of Mr. Ji’s detention say. Mr. Ji was sent to Shanghai by
train.

There he stayed in a Changhong-owned residence under guard. But he was
instructed to visit Apex offices and act as if he were going about
business as usual. He made frequent phone calls back home. As his
Changhong guards listened, he repeatedly told Mr. Hsu to execute
Changhong’s instructions.

The calls did not persuade Mr. Hsu.

“He pretended that nothing was wrong and everything would be worked
out,” Mr. Hsu recalled. “But we knew he was not himself. Eventually,
there was nothing we could say on the phone except, ‘Yes David, O.K.,
yes.’ “

Changhong dispatched accountants and investigators to Los Angeles in
early December, but Apex refused access, arguing that Changhong lacked
legal authority.

It was only then that Changhong took legal action. On Dec. 14, Changhong
sued Apex in Los Angeles County Superior Court. The company alleged
breach of contract and demanded access to Apex, citing the documents Mr.
Ji had signed.

Apex contested the suit. In court documents, it said that Mr. Ji had
been abducted and that the documents had been signed under coercion.

Changhong pressed Mr. Ji harder to make Mr. Hsu cooperate. Mr. Ji
scoffed, saying he had already “fired” his partner on Changhong’s orders
so there was little more he could do, according to the record of his
detention.

There were constant reminders, however, that his fate hung in the
balance. A prosecutor and a judge from Mianyang visited Shanghai to talk
with Mr. Ji. They told him that the 37 checks he had written to
Changhong in early 2003 constituted a serious crime and that he could
get life in prison or even be executed. His only choice was to cooperate
with Changhong, the record said.

Changhong submitted the checks as evidence in its American lawsuit.
There are no visible markings on the checks to show that they were
deposited or sent through the banking system for payment. Apex says that
proves Changhong treated the checks as they were intended - as
collateral to solve an accounting problem. They became obsolete when
Apex made big payments to Changhong in April 2003, the company says.

Mr. Auspitz, Changhong’s lawyer in New York, said that despite any other
payments Apex may have made in 2003, those checks should have been
honored. “There is no question that Apex should have paid and did not,”
he said.

To counter Apex’s argument that Mr. Ji was a hostage, Changhong arranged
to have Mr. Ji deposed in Apex’s Shanghai offices. Mr. Wang, the
Cadwalader lawyer, was present and conducted the videotaped inquiry. Mr.
Ji had no lawyer present, and Apex later argued that that raised
questions of whether the tape would have any value in an American court.

When taping began, Mr. Ji disputed Changhong’s version of events,
prompting a heated argument between Mr. Ji and Mr. Wang, according to
people who saw the confrontation.

The next day, Mr. Ji was taken to meet Mr. Zhao, Changhong’s boss.
Buttons and belt removed, he had to hold his pants up with his hands.
Mr. Zhao warned him that Changhong controlled the courts in Mianyang,
that Mr. Ji would be tried there, and that Changhong would decide if he
lived or died.

“Apex must give Changhong all the money. This is your only way out,” Mr.
Ji was told, according to the record of his detention.

A second taped deposition was arranged. Mr. Ji dressed neatly in a suit.
He sat slumped in his chair and smiled wanly. Everything Mr. Wang asked
him, he muttered agreement. As the camera rolled, he said Changhong had
“invited” him to stay at its apartment in Shanghai while he sorted out
the dispute about the checks.

“I am trying to run my company,” Mr. Ji says on tape. “I am the majority
shareholder and want to use my power to manage this situation.”

High-Level Intervention

Changhong’s lawsuit has remained unresolved in court in Los Angeles. The
taped deposition was never formally submitted, though Apex received a
copy. Apex then complained that Changhong’s lawyer, Mr. Wang, acted
improperly by being a party to the detention of Mr. Ji.

Cadwalader subsequently withdrew from the case and Mr. Wang, who was
made a partner just a few months earlier, left the firm. A spokesman for
Cadwalader declined to comment on the case or on Mr. Wang, citing client
confidentiality. Apex’s business deteriorated as suppliers and customers
learned of its troubles. Its sales this year are off sharply, and it has
teetered on the verge of bankruptcy. It now claims it has no money to
pay even the portion of the Changhong debt it acknowledges owing.

Internally, however, Changhong may have scored a political touchdown.
According to lawyers involved in the case, Changhong submitted a report
to Prime Minister Wen Jiabao shortly after it arranged to have Mr. Ji
detained. The report claims that a fraud masterminded by Mr. Ji put its
business, and its 36,000 workers, in grave peril.

It is unclear if Mr. Wen or other central government officials
investigated the matter independently or endorsed Changhong’s role in
managing Mr. Ji’s custody. But the lawyers involved said Changhong had
boasted repeatedly about receiving Mr. Wen’s support in the form of a
three-point written instruction late last fall.

The prime minister praised Changhong’s leadership, authorized the
company to take legal actions at home and abroad to protect its
interests, and ordered state banks to provide emergency financing
totaling nearly $1 billion, roughly double the amount Changhong claimed
Apex owed it, they said.

The ruling defused the crisis that prompted Changhong to pursue Mr. Ji.
But it left the business dispute unresolved. And it left Mr. Ji in legal
limbo, facing possible prosecution on the alleged fraud the company
described to the leadership.

On May 28, seven months after Mr. Ji was first detained, he was handed
over to the Mianyang police for formal arrest on charges of “financial
instrument fraud,” apparently a reference to the 37 checks he wrote
Changhong.

In formal police custody, Mr. Ji’s conditions improved, according to the
detention record. He has been allowed to visit a hospital to get
treatment for hypertension, a kidney problem and a bladder infection.
The interrogations ceased. American diplomats have visited him
regularly, though they have not spoken publicly about the case.

In June, Apex and Changhong signed a security agreement. Apex
acknowledged a $150 million debt. The debt remains unpaid, however. Apex
claims it has no money.

In August, the police released Mr. Ji on restricted bail. He is allowed
to move around Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province, but he is under
strict orders not to discuss his case with anyone. The police
confiscated his passport and gave him a mobile phone that he must keep
with him 24 hours a day. He has not been indicted, but the local
authorities frequently remind him that they can prosecute at any time.

“They turned this into a criminal case, and now they don’t know how to
resolve it,” says Mr. Hsu of Apex. “I’m afraid we need government
intervention, maybe divine intervention, to help David return home.”

（完）

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/04/rule_by_law_1.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com