.. _200604_rule_by_law_5:

《纽约时报》系列报道：《依法治国》之六（Rule by Law）
========================================================================

`ruanyifeng.com <http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/04/rule_by_law_5.html>`__

下面这篇报道讲的是怒江建坝。这个事情在”新语丝”上讨论多时了，请参见方舟子的\ `说明 <http://blog.sina.com.cn/u/47406879010001gm>`__\ 和\ `给《纽约时报》的抗议信 <http://blog.sina.com.cn/u/47406879010001zd>`__\ 。

暂且不论怒江该不该建坝，我觉得我们关注这篇报道的重点应该是中国的法治建设。我想这也是我转贴它的意义所在。


======================

**寻找中国”愤怒之河”的公共声音**

作者： JIM YARDLEY

原载2005年12月26日《纽约时报》

小沙坝，中国——这里远离当代中国那些繁华的都市，只是一个遍布农舍的小山村。它看上去好像还没有进入20世纪。但是沿着泥泞的小路，经过一条狂吠的狗和饲养的鸡鸭，在怒江边上的一块开阔地，你可以看到南瓜地里躺着一块脏兮兮的水泥板。

它是一个象征，讲述了一场中国法制的斗争。

在这个怒江旁的小山村，云南省计划修建一个巨型水电站，它将有世界上最大的水坝之一。它的发电量甚至超过了巨大的三峡大坝。但是它对这个被认为是生态宝库的地区形成了威胁。这个小山村将会第一个消失。

几十年来，执政的共产动一直靠行政手段来推进这样的项目。但是怒江大坝现在却被搁置了超过一年，它给中国政府出了一个意料之外的难题：中国政府是否应该遵守自己颁布的法律呢？

一个由环保组织领导的运动，正在呼吁中国政府在做出最后决定前，举行公开的听证会，并将一份关于怒江大坝的秘密报告公之于众。在一个人们不能挑战领导的国家，这样的公众参与堪称激进。但是这些组织声称，正是新的《环境保护法》赋予了他们这种权力。

（以下翻译略）


=======================

**Seeking a Public Voice on China’s ‘Angry River’**

By JIM YARDLEY

XIAOSHABA, China - Far from the pulsing cities that symbolize modern
China, this tiny hillside village of crude peasant houses seems
disconnected from this century and the last. But follow a dirt path past
a snarling watchdog, sidestep the chickens and ducks, and a small
clearing on the banks of the Nu River reveals a dusty slab of concrete
lying in a rotting pumpkin patch.

The innocuous concrete block is also a symbol, of a struggle over law
that touches every corner of the country.

The block marks the spot on the Nu River where officials here in Yunnan
Province want to begin building one of the biggest dam projects in the
world. The project would produce more electricity than even the mighty
Three Gorges Dam but would also threaten a region considered an
ecological treasure. This village would be the first place to disappear.

For decades, the ruling Communist Party has rammed through such projects
by fiat. But the Nu River proposal, already delayed for more than a
year, is now unexpectedly presenting the Chinese government with a
quandary of its own making: will it abide by its own laws?

A coalition led by Chinese environmental groups is urging the central
government to hold open hearings and make public a secret report on the
Nu dams before making a final decision. In a country where people cannot
challenge decisions by their leaders, such public participation is a
fairly radical idea. But the groups argue that new environmental laws
grant exactly that right.

“This is the case to set a precedent,” said Ma Jun, an environmental
consultant in Beijing. “For the first time, there is a legal basis for
public participation. If it happens, it would be a major step forward.”

China’s leaders often embrace the concept of rule of law, if leaving
open how they choose to define it. For many people in China’s fledgling
“civil society” - environmentalists, journalists, lawyers, academics and
others - the law has become a tool to promote environmental protection
and to try to expand the rights of individuals in an authoritarian
political system.

But trying to invoke the law is risky. Chinese nongovernmental
organizations, few of which existed a decade ago, have taken up the Nu
as a major cause. But the activism on the Nu and other issues has
provoked deep suspicions by the Communist Party even as a broader
clampdown against such NGO’s has forced some to shut down. The
government knows China has a drastic pollution problem and has passed
new environmental laws. But top leaders also demand high economic growth
and need to increase energy supplies to get it. The “green laws” are
becoming a crucible to test which side will prevail and whether ordinary
people can take part in the process.

The closed process that led to the Three Gorges Dam is what opponents of
the Nu dams most want to avoid. In the late 1980’s, a wide range of
intellectuals and others tried in vain to force public hearings to
discuss the environmental and social costs of a project that has flooded
a vast region and forced huge relocations. Ultimately, opponents could
only muster a symbolic victory as the final vote in the National
People’s Congress included an unusually high number of abstentions or
nay votes.

The central government is still deliberating how to proceed on the Nu.
Domestic media coverage has been banned in recent months. Three central
government ministries refused interview requests, as did provincial
officials in Yunnan. Local officials along the Nu River, after initially
agreeing to an interview, failed to reply to a list of written
questions.

Out in the jagged mountains along China’s remote southwestern border,
villagers in Xiaoshaba gather information about their future from
rumors. In early December, a team of surveyors inventoried property and
measured the narrow terrace of village farmland along the Nu. Several
villagers say local officials have told them that everyone would be
relocated around the upcoming Lunar New Year holiday, which ends in
early February - even if the dams have not yet been approved.

“If they tell me to move,” said one villager, Zhang Jianhua, “I have no
other choice.”

A Legal Reprieve

In the spring of 2003, a slender, studious man named Yu Xiaogang learned
that the hydropower industry was eyeing the rivers of southwestern
China. Mr. Yu, an environmental resources manager, knew that China
believed that hydropower was a cleaner alternative for its energy
shortages and that the Nu was considered one of the country’s richest,
untapped resources. But he and others believed that the Nu would be
untouchable.

The Nu, which translates as Angry River, roars out of the Tibetan
Plateau east of the Himalayas and plunges through steep canyons just
inside the border with Myanmar, formerly Burma, as it careers south
before crossing the border.

In China, it passes through a mountainous region with more than 7,000
species of plants and 80 rare or endangered animals and fish. Unesco
said the region “may be the most biologically diverse temperate
ecosystem in the world” and designated it a World Heritage Site in the
summer of 2003.

“We were very happy because we thought the Nu would be protected and
would have no problems,” said Mr. Yu, who also led Green Watershed, an
environmental NGO.

But not long after the World Heritage designation, a state-run
provincial newspaper announced that a public-private consortium planned
to build 13 dams on the river. The project would be the largest cascade
dam system in the world, and it appeared politically unstoppable.

The majority partner, the China Huadian Corporation, was a state-owned
goliath; the local government was a minority partner. In Beijing, the
State Development and Reform Commission, a powerful government ministry,
had approved the dams in August and planned to present the plan to the
State Council, or the Chinese cabinet, for final approval. Construction
would begin in September 2003.

The environmental community was blindsided. More than 50,000 people,
most of them from ethnic minority hill tribes, would be relocated. The
Nu also was one of only two free flowing rivers in China. The State
Environmental Protection Administration, or SEPA, the country’s
environmental watchdog, criticized the project in its official
newspaper. But SEPA was considered one of the weakest ministries in the
central government.

Then, a snag arose - a bureaucratic delay, hardly uncommon in China.
August became September and the proposal had not yet been presented for
final approval. During the delay, a new environmental law took effect on
Sept. 1. Based on an American model, the China Environmental Impact
Assessment Law required comprehensive environmental reviews in the
planning stages of major public and private development projects.

Decades of relentless economic growth had left China with dire pollution
problems and squandered natural resources. President Hu Jintao had made
“sustainable development” a new government mantra. The assessment law
gave the environmental agency new powers to handle and approve
environmental reviews before a project was approved. It also called for
public participation, including hearings, as part of the review, though
it did not detail specific guidelines.

But it would take public pressure to force action on the Nu case.
Despite its uniqueness and natural beauty, the Nu was not well known,
largely because of its isolated location.

In September 2003, an environmental conference in Beijing brought
together academics, government environmental officials and NGO’s to
discuss the Nu. A month later, Pan Yue, the outspoken vice minister of
the environmental agency, organized China’s first “Green Forum,” a
public relations event that included Chinese music and film stars.

One person at the forum was a woman named Wang Yongchen, a member of
Green Earth Volunteers, an environmental NGO in Beijing. Initially, the
Green Earth Volunteers had concentrated on tree planting and teaching
children about the environment. But in recent years, the group had
participated in efforts to stop a dam proposal in Sichuan Province.

At the forum, Ms. Wang persuaded 62 celebrities and film stars to sign a
petition in support of “natural” rivers. She would later donate money to
build 30 libraries in poor villages along the Nu.

By early 2004, the controversy had attracted worldwide interest as 60
international organizations agreed to lobby the Chinese government about
the Nu. Hundreds of volunteers in China called Unesco to protest the dam
proposal. The country’s most prominent NGO, Friends of Nature, embraced
the cause, while an environmental group in Sichuan collected more than
10,000 signatures to stop the project.

But the crucial factor was the Sept. 1 law. As the project appeared to
be nearing approval, biologists, academics and environmentalists all
argued that the government had not properly conducted an environmental
review.

In late winter, as Ms. Wang guided a tour of Chinese journalists, her
cellphone rang. A friend informed her that Prime Minister Wen Jiabao had
temporarily suspended the project so that it could be “carefully
discussed and decided on scientifically.”

Ms. Wang began to cry with joy. Later, some Chinese newspapers
speculated that Mr. Wen’s edict meant that the project was dead.

Mr. Yu thought otherwise.

“I thought this was the first success of public participation,” he said.
“But I did not think the decision was final.”

Opening a Closed Process

Located a short drive from the city of Liuku, Xiaoshaba is like
countless poor villages along the Nu. Peasants live in crude homes, some
under the same roof as their livestock and chickens. Some villagers have
never gone farther than Liuku; some have never left the village. But on
a May afternoon in 2004, a bus arrived. Inside was Yu Xiaogang, and he
wanted to take villagers on a trip.

The prime minister’s order to suspend the project had stunned developers
and provincial officials. A delegation had hurried to Beijing to try to
restart the process. At the same time, the government’s environmental
agency focused on the assessment review.

Mr. Yu was anxious to get villagers involved because the law had
highlighted public participation. Most villagers knew nothing about the
project or how it would change their lives.

“I thought we must let the Nu River people have their voice,” Mr. Yu
said.

So he offered to take a small group of villagers to the site of the
Manwan Dam on the upper reaches of Mekong River in the southern Yunnan.
In 2002, Mr. Yu had written an assessment of the social costs of the
Manwan project, a report later endorsed by the prime minister at the
time, Zhu Rongji. Leaving from Xiaoshaba, Mr. Yu took 14 peasants on a
daylong journey to the Manwan, where they found many people living as
scavengers.

“They heard how the government made promises but didn’t follow through,”
Mr. Yu said. “Ten years later, nobody cared about them. The Nu River
people were shocked.”

Mr. Yu later led a small group of peasants to a Beijing hydropower
conference jointly sponsored by the United Nations and China’s National
Development and Reform Commission. As several speakers extolled the
virtues of dams, the dusty group of peasants sat in the upper reaches of
the auditorium. Mr. Yu was allowed to speak at a sub-session of the
conference. The villagers had practiced giving speeches but were not
granted a speaking slot.

Meanwhile, momentum seemed to be shifting in favor of dam supporters.
Prime Minister Wen had visited Yunnan to confer with provincial
officials. Two prominent scholars toured the Nu - on a trip sponsored by
dam developers - and attracted wide public attention by attacking the
environmentalists.

But that criticism was insignificant compared to a broader governmental
crackdown under way against nongovernmental organizations.

In the spring of this year, President Hu ordered an intensive
examination of NGO’s because of concerns of the role that environmental
groups had played in helping to topple governments in Central Asia. In a
secret speech to top officials, Mr. Hu warned that the United States was
using such groups to try to foment social unrest.

Before, NGO’s had hoped that onerous licensing restrictions were about
to be repealed. Instead, environmental groups and other NGO’s across the
country were closely scrutinized, with some losing their licenses. Some
groups began to fear that the “legal space” granted to the civil society
would be tightened, or closed.

In Yunnan, officials began to pressure opponents. Mr. Yu would not
comment about whether he had come under pressure. But acquaintances say
he that has been forbidden from traveling to international conferences
and that officials have put pressure on him.

In Beijing, the environmental assessment report was finished by this
summer. But the Ministry of Water Resources, noting that government
reports about international rivers were considered proprietary
information, declared a small section of the assessment to be a state
secret and forbade its release.

Dam opponents said the section could remain secret but argued that
publicizing the rest of the report was essential for public discussion
of the project. The government still had not outlined the potential
environmental risks or explained what would happen to relocated
villagers.

So on Aug. 31, opponents mailed a letter to the State Council and later
posted it on the Internet. It cited Chinese law and said any decision
without public participation “lacks public support and cannot tolerate
history’s scrutiny.”

Nearly four months later, the government had not responded.

An Uncertain Future

A traffic sign on the narrow, unpaved road that passes through Xiaoshaba
carries a propaganda message: “A Model Village for Democratic Rule of
Law.” A short walk away, beside the concrete block marking the proposed
first dam, Guan Fulin, 55, said she had spoken to the surveyors who
measured the village land in early December.

“The officials told us it is definitely going to happen,” Mrs. Guan
said. She trusted that the government would take care of her but
admitted that she did not yet know how she would be compensated or where
she would go. Pointing to the village, she said, “All these people will
be moving.”

If so, it would likely signal the start of a hydropower gold rush in
Yunnan Province. One study estimated that China might build enough new
dams, most of them in Yunnan, to double its hydroelectric output in the
next five years. One plan would inundate one of the most popular tourist
attractions in China - Tiger Leaping Gorge.

Part of the frenzied hydropower development is driven by the thirst for
new energy supplies. But part of it is caused by the breakup of the
state monopoly that once controlled electrical generation in China. That
breakup left regional state-owned energy giants who were each assigned
“assets” - like rivers or coal deposits. Each faces competitive
pressures to develop new power plants quickly in order to claim market
share.

Mr. Ma, the environmental consultant in Beijing, said environmentalists
understood that China faced a complex challenge in developing new energy
sources even as it must reduce pollution. But he said this intense
pressure to develop was why laws that provide oversight and public
review must serve as safeguards.

“Before the Nu River proposal, you would hear about opposition to
certain projects,” Mr. Ma said. “But it was all based on the tremendous
courage of individuals. This time, we see progress in Chinese law that
makes it possible for a more systemic challenge.”

He added: “There is now more awareness of environmental rights and the
rights of people as citizens. For such a major problem, they believe
they have the right to know about it and at least have their views
heard.”

The dispute over the Nu seems at a standstill. Ultimately, the decision
on holding hearings may fall to the prime minister. Earlier this year,
Unesco issued a statement expressing its “gravest concerns” about the
potential damage to the World Heritage Site. In October,
environmentalists boycotted a dam conference linked to the National
Reform and Development Commission. Organizers had promised to show parts
of the assessment report, but environmentalists believed it was an
effort to avoid full public hearings.

Ms. Wang, of the NGO Green Earth Volunteers, described the dilemma in
simple terms.

“If the law is not enforced, what shall we do?” she asked. “We have this
law. Why doesn’t this law work?”

（完）

.. note::
    原文地址: http://www.ruanyifeng.com/blog/2006/04/rule_by_law_5.html 
    作者: 阮一峰 

    编辑: 木书架 http://www.me115.com